[Amit Varma]: If India was a person, she'd be in severe danger from COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: She's 73 years old.
[Amit Varma]: She's got comorbidities.
[Amit Varma]: Some organs have failed.
[Amit Varma]: Some organs never worked.
[Amit Varma]: Some parts of her body are at war with others.
[Amit Varma]: It's a mess.
[Amit Varma]: If she was an old woman sitting down to make a sweater, she'd be knitting holes.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, India is a country, not a person, so I won't take the analogy too far.
[Amit Varma]: As we hit the 73rd anniversary of our independence, it's worth looking back at this great nation
[Amit Varma]: of ours.
[Amit Varma]: How did we get here?
[Amit Varma]: What did we do right?
[Amit Varma]: What did we do wrong?
[Amit Varma]: What is this we even?
[Amit Varma]: We take so much about our country for granted.
[Amit Varma]: The poverty and injustice, the normalized excesses of our politics, our very existence.
[Amit Varma]: Let's step back and take a deeper look.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is a bit like an achievement unlocked moment, because from the time I started
[Amit Varma]: the show, I have wanted to have Pratap Bhanumata as a guest on the show.
[Amit Varma]: We could never quite make it work so far.
[Amit Varma]: But here we are talking about the wide ranging subject of India over the last 73 years.
[Amit Varma]: People refer to Pratap as PBM, and I refer to myself as a PBM fanboy.
[Amit Varma]: I regard him as a finest essayist in our country, so far above the rest that there isn't even
[Amit Varma]: a shortlist.
[Amit Varma]: This leads to one awkward moment for me every month.
[Amit Varma]: During the online writing course that I teach, the art of clear writing, I teach the values
[Amit Varma]: of clarity and simplicity when writing for a mainstream newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: I tell my students, make it easy for the reader to process what you are writing.
[Amit Varma]: Avoid long sentences, avoid words that are too big, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Then at some point in the month long course, they ask me, so who are the writers you like
[Amit Varma]: in the Indian media?
[Amit Varma]: And the first name I take, of course, is that of Pratap.
[Amit Varma]: And then they all jump on me.
[Amit Varma]: He uses long sentences, he uses big words, he even uses adverbs, look screenshot.
[Amit Varma]: At that point, I have to take a step back and go into explanations like, yes, but he's
[Amit Varma]: allowed to because he packs so much into so little.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, one of the reasons it's so rewarding to read Pratap is that he can go so much deeper
[Amit Varma]: in an 800 word column than any other writer I can think of.
[Amit Varma]: This demands that readers have a deeper engagement with the text.
[Amit Varma]: So when you sit down to read Pratap, you're not skimming, you're diving in.
[Amit Varma]: And that, to me, justifies the fact that the prose has a rhythm that I would otherwise
[Amit Varma]: say is not quite suited for mainstream newspapers.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, matters of style aside, Pratap is the most insightful commentator on India that
[Amit Varma]: I have ever read.
[Amit Varma]: He has an acute sense of the political and cultural DNA of this country.
[Amit Varma]: And I have never read anything by him that does not increase my understanding of India.
[Amit Varma]: That makes him the perfect guest, therefore, for this Independence Day special episode.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to our conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen has been a labour of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics of
[Amit Varma]: producing the show myself – scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this – for every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel is worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support, and contributing an amount
[Amit Varma]: of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps, and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going – sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Pratap, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: It's a great privilege being here, and frankly, a little intimidating as well, but, you know,
[Guest]: look forward to learning from you.
[Amit Varma]: No, hardly, it's far more intimidating for me, you know, I'll, I'll make a confession
[Amit Varma]: here that when I began this podcast, three years ago, I made a quick list of names of
[Amit Varma]: people I would want on the show, and you were number one, so finally, achievement unlocked
[Guest]: for me.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Your encouragement means a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of start by sort of talking about your early life, like what I'd be really
[Amit Varma]: keen on like the Pratap Bhanu Mehta that of course, we've never met, but the Pratap Bhanu
[Amit Varma]: Mehta that I know is, of course, a public intellectual, I've read all of your columns
[Amit Varma]: and the impression one would get from that is that the moment you popped out in the world,
[Amit Varma]: you were reading political philosophy and, you know, speaking in, you know, long complex
[Amit Varma]: sentences, but tell me a little bit about what you sort of were as a kid, what your
[Amit Varma]: influences were, and how your sort of intellectual journey made you the sort of political scientist
[Amit Varma]: that you were.
[Guest]: Oh, gosh.
[Guest]: You know, there's that old joke, right, that the deepest influences are so deep that you
[Guest]: don't even realize their influences.
[Guest]: So I'll probably get this narrative wrong.
[Guest]: I mean, it is true that as a child, I think my reputation amongst teachers was that one
[Guest]: thing I was absolutely reluctant to do was any physical activity.
[Guest]: So I would just sit in one place and sort of read a book or something.
[Guest]: I think one way of organizing, you know, my thoughts to this question you've asked is
[Guest]: maybe just pick out three or four key moments.
[Guest]: I mean, I am what is in our circles called an academic brat, which is grew up in an academic
[Guest]: family.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think all the insensitive arguments about politics, political theory,
[Guest]: political philosophy were sort of in our years from birth.
[Guest]: It was an interesting household, and in some senses, I think, even in my political views,
[Guest]: I think it's had quite a considerable influence, not in terms of specific beliefs.
[Guest]: But as I've grown older, I've come to realize that I think politics is almost as much about
[Guest]: a kind of temperament that you cultivate and the kinds of virtues you value.
[Guest]: I think most people in my family, particularly my grandfather, who was actually in politics,
[Guest]: started politics in Rajasthan for many years, but my father also and my mother had in full
[Guest]: measure.
[Guest]: There was a interesting and easy kind of religiosity in the household.
[Guest]: I mean, this joke in the household is there isn't a place of worship we don't like and
[Guest]: we don't visit.
[Guest]: But it combined that easy religiosity with also a deep kind of intellectualism about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And in some senses, I think the question, the metaphysical question in some senses,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: What is the ground of being?
[Guest]: What is the nature of our consciousness?
[Guest]: That kind of hovered in the air in the household a lot, almost naturally.
[Guest]: I mean, apart from professional colleagues, apart from political scientists, there was
[Guest]: that sort of whole other kind of conversational idiom.
[Guest]: And the two things that I do think were important hindsight about that experience, I think one
[Guest]: was a very different view of what a religious life actually means and what it looks like.
[Guest]: I think my grandfather's two greatest attributes, one that a religious life has to be utterly
[Guest]: free from vanity of any kind, and second, that the meaning of life in some senses has
[Guest]: to come from a purpose that is not instrumental.
[Guest]: And one of the interesting things I found about genuinely religious people, I think
[Guest]: in ways that you come across, is there is a kind of, I actually think in genuinely religious
[Guest]: people, there is a healthy skepticism about the world, which is to say that the lack of
[Guest]: vanity and detachment comes from, you know, the sense of, you might say, the transience
[Guest]: of that world.
[Guest]: And that can be actually channelized into a kind of healthy distance and skepticism
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: I mean, you might say mysticism and skepticism are kind of two sides of the same coin.
[Guest]: But I think that sensibility, I mean, I don't want to put it in sort of philosophical propositions,
[Guest]: but I think that sensibility has remained, I think, quite powerful for me and defines
[Guest]: the way in which I think I relate to religion.
[Guest]: And I think it's a sensibility that's increasingly vanishing.
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, even the kinds of religious speeches that we encountered were far more
[Guest]: ecumenical.
[Guest]: I think almost all of them subscribe to that dateline from Madhushala.
[Guest]: So that sensibility, I think, has remained important.
[Guest]: But it also, I think, convinced me that I think it's more a temperament, not so much
[Guest]: a kind of public philosophy, you want to sort of articulate it in propositional terms.
[Guest]: It actually loses, in fact, it becomes it's very opposite, right?
[Guest]: Because the idea is to give everybody the space to find, you know, the law of their
[Guest]: own being as it were.
[Guest]: And understand it in non-instrumental terms.
[Guest]: So that was, I think, the first sort of, you know, formative moment in lasting influence.
[Guest]: The second is a interesting political memory.
[Guest]: And I know as we grow older, we sometimes exaggerate what we remember.
[Guest]: But this, I think, I can say with honesty that the emergency was a defining moment for
[Guest]: us as children.
[Guest]: I mean, I was about eight years old.
[Guest]: And the astonishing thing is we were living in Shimla at the time.
[Guest]: And I think the three things that were very much in the air, which we even grasped as
[Guest]: children very profoundly, right?
[Guest]: One was the potential violation of civil liberties, the threats that, you know, my father's colleagues
[Guest]: were being arrested, the potential threat of him being arrested.
[Guest]: You know, there were sort of clandestine information papers being passed because there was a complete
[Guest]: blackout on news media, so, you know, this was like a cloak and dagger game, you know.
[Guest]: These papers would arrive and you were supposed to tear them up, otherwise it'd be incriminating.
[Guest]: It I think was one moment which created a kind of instinctive anti-authoritarianism.
[Guest]: Maybe I had this anarchist streak.
[Guest]: In any case, an instinctive anti-authoritarianism.
[Guest]: Probably a little bit of a distrust of the Congress party qua organization, if not so
[Guest]: much its stated ideology.
[Guest]: And I think the third thing, which had appeared in a small way in a state like Himachal, I
[Guest]: mean, you know, one doesn't associate these things with Himachal, was for the first time
[Guest]: there was a kind of nativist movement in Himachal, Himachal for Himachalis, I mean, Himachal University
[Guest]: where my father was teaching, was a young university and had created an extraordinary
[Guest]: wealth of talent, actually, now that we look back.
[Guest]: But you know, there was a movement saying, look, Himachal should be for Himachalis and
[Guest]: that in part prompted our move out of Himachal, you know, in a sense, back to Rajasthan.
[Guest]: So I think that sort of anti-nativism, anti-authoritarianism, that instinctive, I think came from the emergency.
[Guest]: The third moment, if I would say, I think was the departure to Oxford.
[Guest]: So I finished my schooling in Rajasthan, in Jaipur, and it was a nice kind of idyllic
[Guest]: existence, actually.
[Guest]: I mean, I think, you know, Jaipur was a kind of manageable town.
[Guest]: The kind of freedom you can have when you can navigate the whole town on a bicycle and
[Guest]: not worry about safety or anything else is not a freedom we've experienced since.
[Guest]: I left for Oxford right after high school, and I know people can have different experiences
[Guest]: in Oxford, but for political philosophy, Oxford between 1985 and 1988 was just an astonishing
[Guest]: place.
[Guest]: I mean, I was lucky to have two extraordinary tutors, one who's been a kind of abiding friend
[Guest]: almost throughout life, Alan Ryan, the other was John Gray.
[Guest]: But apart from that, I mean, you know, Oxford had Jerry Cohen, Derek Parfit, Amartya Sen,
[Guest]: Ronald Rorkin, Joseph Raz, and this is like, you know, one of those sort of one-in-a-century
[Guest]: moments for political theory.
[Guest]: And it just reinforced in me, I think, the love of the subject that I had probably picked
[Guest]: up as a child.
[Guest]: My decision to go to graduate school was a very simple one, which is what kinds of books
[Guest]: do you want to read?
[Guest]: Frankly, there was no other kind of forethought to it.
[Guest]: But more substantively, I think what Oxford did, which was, I think, interesting was,
[Guest]: you know, I think when I went to Oxford, the little of the intellectual milieu that I was
[Guest]: familiar with was by and large opposed to liberalism.
[Guest]: I wouldn't say it's anti-liberal, but I think in Indian political discourse and political
[Guest]: thought, there has always been this construction of liberalism as somehow being associated
[Guest]: with a selfish, possessive individualism, liberalism having no sense of community.
[Guest]: You know, there's a standard range of criticisms, right?
[Guest]: Liberalism really having no moral foundations other than self-interest.
[Guest]: And what I think Oxford did for me was revive a kind of interest in the deep moral foundations
[Guest]: of liberalism, which I think continued when I went to do my doctoral work at Princeton.
[Guest]: Alan Ryan was an extraordinary teacher.
[Guest]: I mean, I think one of the amazing things he did was, as a teacher, was, you know, he
[Guest]: would always say that even reading is an ethical act in some ways, which is that it involves
[Guest]: a sense of fairness to other people's arguments.
[Guest]: And the ability to get inside other people's arguments, particularly people whose views
[Guest]: you disagree with.
[Guest]: So, you know, if you're giving a lecture on Marx, or if you're giving a lecture on Hegel,
[Guest]: it should appear as if you were, you know, in a sense incarnating them, right?
[Guest]: And that's a minimal kind of fairness.
[Guest]: And I think that's very much part of a liberal sensibility in some ways, talking about kind
[Guest]: of temperament that, you know, I then went to Princeton and, through a series of accidents,
[Guest]: ended up doing a PhD on Adam Smith.
[Guest]: That's kind of a quad journey from this kind of interest in liberalism and religion to
[Guest]: Adam Smith, Adam Smith in the Scottish Enlightenment, and particularly on Adam Smith's moral philosophy.
[Guest]: And two things that struck me about Adam Smith at the time, which kind of drew me to him,
[Guest]: was one, you know, now, of course, there's been a revival of Adam Smith and people take
[Guest]: his moral philosophy very seriously, but in the 80s, frankly, beyond reading excerpts
[Guest]: from the Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith was not part of, as it were, the larger literature.
[Guest]: And I was very struck by two things in Adam Smith's sensibility.
[Guest]: One, again, the same anti-authoritarianism.
[Guest]: I think people often forget that the Wealth of Nations is really also as much about protecting
[Guest]: the state from concentrations of power as anything else.
[Guest]: And the second was, I think, his attitude to history, you know, which has been nicely
[Guest]: described as skeptical Whigism, which is the belief in the possibility of progress, but
[Guest]: the deep sense that a lot of progress is a series of accidents, conjunctures, sometimes
[Guest]: bad people do good things, sometimes good people do bad things.
[Guest]: And I think the Scottish Enlightenment, both Hume and Smith, are absolutely wonderful at
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: So, you know, Smith, for example, in his attitude to capitalism, he doesn't have a single good
[Guest]: moral word to say about owners of capital.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, he says, look, you know, there's certain good that comes from deploying
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Or, for example, his classic discussion of slavery in American democracy, right?
[Guest]: That his prediction that a republic would be the last to abolish slavery.
[Guest]: So there was a kind of paradoxical historical sensibility, which seemed to me to be far
[Guest]: more defensible, I think, than a lot of, I think, approaches to history that try and
[Guest]: find the master key.
[Guest]: I mean, I like that intellectual effort, because sometimes saying it's a complicated can also
[Guest]: be an intellectual cop out, right?
[Guest]: You just say there's lots of things.
[Guest]: But that kind of easy complexity, I think, that Smith had, I think, was hugely attractive.
[Guest]: I think the anti-authoritarian instincts, again.
[Guest]: And I think it was at Princeton, although I did not end up working on this, but also
[Guest]: the much deeper engagement with modern liberalism, again.
[Guest]: I think John Rawls's theory of justice was sort of our Bible.
[Guest]: And I went through a complicated relationship with that book.
[Guest]: I mean, I think at the time, partly because it was so dominant, you know, there was a
[Guest]: kind of natural young person's instinct to rebel against the hegemony of Rawls.
[Guest]: We would always joke, you know, write essays called not another paper on Rawls.
[Guest]: But as I've grown older, I do think it's one of the most remarkable books ever written.
[Guest]: I think there's a very austere dignity to that book.
[Guest]: And it's almost deceptive.
[Guest]: I mean, almost nobody reads part three of the theory of justice, which is an astonishing
[Guest]: piece of moral psychology.
[Guest]: I mean, you don't have to agree with the specific principles Rawls advances.
[Guest]: But I think as an answer to the fundamental question of political existence, which is
[Guest]: how can you reconcile social cooperation with a recognition of our basic freedom and equality,
[Guest]: I think it's probably the most interesting framework with which to think.
[Guest]: The final thing I'd just say in this journey and as a moment, I think, was another teacher
[Guest]: I encountered at Princeton, George Kateb.
[Guest]: I mean, Alan also had moved to Princeton.
[Guest]: So there was kind of that continuity from Oxford.
[Guest]: And George Kateb was a remarkable figure in American political theory.
[Guest]: He's not much known outside academic circles, but really one of the truly great teachers
[Guest]: in American academia, very different from Alan's in the sense that much more combative
[Guest]: in his teaching style with very strong sort of views.
[Guest]: But the one thing, you know, which was his life's work, I think, and I'm putting it in
[Guest]: my words, I think he put it a lot more eloquently, was, I think hanging out with him nourished
[Guest]: my instinctive rebelliousness against any kind of collective pronouns or forms of collective
[Guest]: identity, where, you know, the very act of naming you in a particular collective identity
[Guest]: actually can be antithetical to your freedom, because it benchmarks you, right?
[Guest]: If somebody says, you know, are you a Hindu, are you Jewish, are you Muslim?
[Guest]: What does that actually mean?
[Guest]: Who benchmarks the content of what it means to be that, right?
[Guest]: He also used to make, I think, the important point, which is in some ways obvious, but
[Guest]: not well recognized, is that when we get absorbed in a collective identity, right, the form
[Guest]: of living that we engage in also becomes a little bit vicarious.
[Guest]: There's a thrill to it, you know, Sachin Tendulkar's achievement becomes my achievement, and frankly,
[Guest]: there is no thrill more unmatched than that, right?
[Guest]: On the other hand, the fact of the matter is that it is his achievement, right?
[Guest]: And that vicariousness also produces a kind of moral blindness, and that's the moral blindness
[Guest]: that in a sense licenses all crimes in the name of collectivities in a way that you would
[Guest]: not sanction if they were done in the name of an individual, right?
[Guest]: And particularly, I think, I mean, while I understand the historical importance of nationalism,
[Guest]: which is something we can talk about, but the fact that nationalism exhibits both of
[Guest]: these traits, right, I think it can be antithetical to freedom in the sense that it benchmarks
[Guest]: people and it unleashes a kind of violent vicariousness, which, you know, turns ordinary
[Guest]: people into, I think, let's say, less empathetic towards otherness.
[Guest]: So I think that's probably, you know, I think the broad intellectual journey, I think the
[Guest]: last and final twist, I mean, talking about oneself is never hugely interesting, but is
[Guest]: we then, I mean, I was in the United States for almost 17 years, after Princeton, went
[Guest]: and taught at Harvard, and walked into that job, again, almost accidentally with the encouragement
[Guest]: of some professors.
[Guest]: And the idea was always to come back to India, and for two reasons, I mean, one, I had this
[Guest]: big sense that the real stakes are actually in India, I mean, at that time, America was
[Guest]: characterized by a deep overlapping consensus.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it's hard to imagine that world now in this polarized, and, you know,
[Guest]: if you're interested in the future of political theory, India was the place in some ways,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, it was going to have exactly the role that 19th century Europe had, right?
[Guest]: The society of the future, all the big debates are happening.
[Guest]: So we came back.
[Guest]: And I think coming back, of course, also led me back to much deeper interest in Indian
[Guest]: politics and Indian traditions, which is something I never formally studied while I was in the
[Guest]: United States.
[Guest]: I mean, I always thought my connection to India was way too personal for me, I didn't
[Guest]: want to write on it as a kind of academic subject for the American Political Science
[Guest]: Association, and within those genres.
[Guest]: And the re-engagement with Indian political thought, I think, Ambedkar particularly was
[Guest]: a huge revelation, whom I had studied only cursorily before then.
[Guest]: And I think we all still study only cursorily.
[Guest]: One because of his absolutely unblinkered view of Indian society in almost every aspect
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: And really a kind of moral clarity of take no prisoners, which is astonishing.
[Guest]: But I think second, I think he did put his finger on, I think, the original sin of Indian
[Guest]: civilization, which is caste.
[Guest]: And you don't have to agree with Ambedkar.
[Guest]: But I think the fact that that legacy and history informs not just social conflicts,
[Guest]: but also, frankly, our insecurities about religion and metaphysics.
[Guest]: You don't have to agree with his claim that, you know, Indian metaphysics of Indian thought
[Guest]: rises and falls with caste, and if you take away caste, there's nothing else.
[Guest]: But it's hard to deny the fact that we are so anxious about its status, has something
[Guest]: to do with, you know, in some sense, with caste.
[Guest]: And the second thing about Ambedkar is that he's the first and only thoroughgoing modern
[Guest]: constitutionalist in the Indian tradition, who just says, look, we have to act as if
[Guest]: we are free and equal.
[Guest]: You don't have to give arguments for this.
[Guest]: In fact, anybody who demands arguments for this is probably already playing mischief,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Who's talking the language of modern constitutionalism, he has none of Nehru's sentimentalism.
[Guest]: He, I think, very clearly sees the limitations of this extraordinary nationalist project,
[Guest]: which at one level was trying to create the space for a Indian way of thinking, right?
[Guest]: But I think Ambedkar's question is very simple.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, what you need is liberty, equality, and fraternity, and everything else
[Guest]: follows from that.
[Guest]: But if you start at the identity end of the story, what is an Indian way of thinking,
[Guest]: then you're down the path of self-destruction.
[Guest]: So you know, I guess it's all of these elements, and I'm not sure these different elements
[Guest]: can be easily reconciled, but that's how at least I see kind of my journey, not well exemplified.
[Guest]: I won't hold any of these people responsible for my failings, but at least those were the
[Guest]: deep moments of engagement.
[Amit Varma]: I think Ketab and Ryan just heaved a sigh of relief that they won't be held responsible
[Amit Varma]: by you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's a lot to unpack here.
[Amit Varma]: And I was, so I'll kind of go through the different strands one by one.
[Amit Varma]: One I was, you know, struck by what you said about, you know, the role that religion played
[Amit Varma]: in your life in the sense that we often think of, you know, religion and rationality as
[Amit Varma]: two things which are completely apart from each other.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, and you know, that a true religious person may have that sort
[Amit Varma]: of sense of distance from the material world that he can then be more dispassionate about
[Amit Varma]: it and therefore more skeptical, which was fascinating for me.
[Amit Varma]: So while I don't really want to, you know, get too much into the personal, but I'm kind
[Amit Varma]: of fascinated by the role of sort of religiosity in sort of shaping the way you think, are
[Guest]: you a religious person?
[Guest]: I mean, the short answer is yes.
[Guest]: And I have no hesitation saying that the only reason I hesitated for a second is that, you
[Guest]: know, Wittgenstein has this wonderful line that he once said that, you know, I was going
[Guest]: to write that I'm writing to the glory of God.
[Guest]: But a statement like that can be misunderstood.
[Guest]: And what he meant by that was not that there's a kind of vanity in saying, you know, I'm
[Guest]: religious, or that, you know, you want to look good in the eyes of people who are not.
[Guest]: I think it was the profound sense that he had that the conditions of making religion
[Guest]: intelligible in a subjective way no longer exist.
[Guest]: So when somebody says, are you religious or are you X or Y?
[Guest]: One is actually not sure what set of expectations is being actually backed into that claim.
[Guest]: So that's the, and one of the problems, in a sense, I think challenges religion in some
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: And in that sense, I think, you know, it is in tension with the world, is that those conditions
[Guest]: of intelligibility exist even less and less.
[Guest]: I mean, you are an imaginative kind of interlocutor, but you can imagine 25 other contexts in which
[Guest]: saying I'm religious might evoke associations that you yourself do not have about that term.
[Guest]: And I think that also, in a sense, exemplified, I think, Kateb's point about sort of the act
[Guest]: of naming public identities in this way, that identities are best, you know, if they're
[Guest]: kind of background facts about you, which is the ground on which you stand, and that
[Guest]: gives you a freedom to act.
[Guest]: But they become perversions if they become a kind of exhibitionist goal in some ways
[Guest]: that you have.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: I was also kind of struck by the serendipitous nature of this conversation itself.
[Amit Varma]: Because in, you know, two of my recent episodes, I have sort of examined authors that you just
[Amit Varma]: spoke about, I had an episode with Russ Roberts, where we spoke a lot about Adam Smith, particularly
[Amit Varma]: a theory of moral sentiments.
[Amit Varma]: And in my last episode with Karthik Muralidharan, we also discussed Rawls a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: And I gave my contentious gyaan on why libertarianism can be derived from Rawls.
[Amit Varma]: But that's sort of a separate matter.
[Amit Varma]: I was also, you know, very struck by your quoting Alan Ryan on how reading can be an
[Amit Varma]: ethical act.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that, you know, when you join the academia, for example, the one
[Amit Varma]: thing that you're, of course, doing is that you are, you know, being introduced to frames
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the world.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, as you kind of figure that out, and I think what happens when you
[Amit Varma]: discover frames to look at the world is that every frame that sort of, you know, and different
[Amit Varma]: frames will seem complete in and of themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, they are very seductive, because a very complicated world and the complicated
[Amit Varma]: processes of history can be, you know, suddenly seem intelligible, and you're like, okay,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this explains the world so beautifully, this is who I am, and then you define yourself
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that you haven't done that you haven't not just chosen sort of an ideological
[Amit Varma]: collective like that.
[Amit Varma]: But you've kind of remained open in the sense that it is therefore sort of hard to pin you
[Amit Varma]: down and say that, oh, you know, PBM is this or that or, or whatever, you're examining
[Amit Varma]: everything critically.
[Amit Varma]: And how difficult does that become within the world of academia, because surely, there
[Amit Varma]: are pressures that you see around you to conform to a particular ways of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: That's part one.
[Amit Varma]: And part two, then is that when you come back to India, I've noticed that a lot of the frames
[Amit Varma]: that you could carry with you to look at the world, for example, the frame of left and
[Amit Varma]: right in politics, don't really apply to India, and you have to then sort of discard bits
[Amit Varma]: of that and start, you know, constructing your own frames, as it were, or figuring all
[Amit Varma]: that stuff out for yourself.
[Guest]: So what was that process like?
[Guest]: That's a fascinating question, actually, it says a lot about the state of academia.
[Guest]: So I think two things, right?
[Guest]: One, as I say, I think as an intellectual enterprise, I think the search for parsimony
[Guest]: and a master key is very worthy.
[Guest]: In fact, you need space for people doing that, right.
[Guest]: And for that kind of grand theorizing in some ways, right, I mean, it really moves the horizons
[Guest]: of our thinking, right.
[Guest]: But I think it's important to remember that theory is not the world, in some ways.
[Guest]: I mean, I think that's something kind of and, you know, one of the most important things,
[Guest]: I think, again, coming back to Adam Smith, right, is that it's interesting, both in his
[Guest]: moral theory, but also in his theory of science.
[Guest]: The one thing that he recognized was the power of the imagination a lot more.
[Guest]: In fact, he says, look, we are neither creatures of reason in some sense or fashion, we are
[Guest]: more driven by imagination.
[Guest]: And imagination does have a way of kind of putting together contradictory things in a
[Guest]: way in which reason does not, right.
[Guest]: So you know, in that sense, I think just being alive to the complexity of reality, that theory
[Guest]: is at most a lens, like every lens, the critical thing is under what conditions.
[Guest]: And reality is one of those things where, under what conditions, pretty much changes
[Guest]: instantly.
[Guest]: I mean, a philosopher once made this very nice distinction that, you know, when we are
[Guest]: academics, we have to think in terms of other things being equal, right?
[Guest]: That's how economists think often, right?
[Guest]: All our models are other things being equal.
[Guest]: When we are doing normative, pure normative theory in philosophy, that's where other things
[Guest]: be equal, right?
[Guest]: Here are the arguments.
[Guest]: When you deal with reality, it's all things considered, in some ways.
[Guest]: So I think that's, I think, one important element.
[Guest]: I've always been struck by a line of Neil's words, you know, which was that the opposite
[Guest]: of truth is falsehood, but the opposite of deep truth is another deep truth.
[Guest]: That there is something to, you know, I think that's it.
[Guest]: But the second thing I think which is important, and this is something I do think academics
[Guest]: sometimes underestimate, is that the world of politics is different from the world of
[Guest]: academia.
[Guest]: And I think it'd be disastrous for the world if the world of politics was simply the world
[Guest]: of a particular set of ideas writ large.
[Guest]: I think politics begins, I think, in the fact of disagreement.
[Guest]: Frankly, if we didn't disagree, we wouldn't actually need politics in a deep sense of
[Guest]: the term, right?
[Guest]: The disagreement can have many sources.
[Guest]: I mean, it can be in ideas, it can be reasoning, it can come from your positions, it can come
[Guest]: from who you are, right?
[Guest]: And the task of politics, in a sense, is to recognize this plurality, I mean, which is
[Guest]: why when academics think that the purpose of politics is to, in a sense, enact a particular
[Guest]: idea, whether it's Marxist on the one hand or libertarian, it's that moment where you
[Guest]: cease to be political, in some senses.
[Guest]: I mean, it's as oxymoronic as you might say Christian politics might be.
[Guest]: I mean, you know the answer to the question before it's been asked.
[Guest]: Politics also operates in the realm of legitimacy rather than the realm of truth, right?
[Guest]: Which is, you and I might disagree, I might be more centrist, you might be more libertarian.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, the political job is, can we find a way of actually living together
[Guest]: in a way in which both of us feel we have space?
[Guest]: But also in some ways, right, our core sense of being is recognized, right?
[Guest]: Now that's a very different problem from the intellectual problem of what is the truth.
[Guest]: I mean, you might well be right, you know, in the way you reason.
[Guest]: I might well be right, but that is actually not the political problem.
[Guest]: And dismissing disagreement simply as a function of lesser reasoning, right, and that's very
[Guest]: tempting for academics to do, you know, where the answer to every disagreement is, if you
[Guest]: only thought enough, you would come to my point of view.
[Guest]: That actually, I think, strikes me as just a misleading description of the human condition.
[Guest]: Now, you mentioned kind of conformity and the pressure to conform, I think, in academia.
[Guest]: I'd say two things.
[Guest]: Yes, there are.
[Guest]: I mean, I think academics can also function like collective tribes.
[Guest]: Often the pressure to conform is not what people think it is, which is, particularly
[Guest]: in the social sciences and humanities, it's actually not political views, it's actually
[Guest]: methodological views.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, various departments like to reproduce their own sort of method of inquiry
[Guest]: in some ways, right?
[Guest]: And I think a lot of the kind of most pedantic and frustrating disputes in academia are actually
[Guest]: over that institutional control, right?
[Guest]: But I think coming to more substantive things, I think, look, I think you obviously have
[Guest]: to have some set of values and, you know, the joke about liberals that they can't take
[Guest]: their own side in an argument, I think, is a telling joke in some ways.
[Guest]: I think that certainly applies when it comes to world views, and you have to be open to
[Guest]: receptivity, but you have to have some baseline moral values, right?
[Guest]: Some things that allow you to draw a red line.
[Guest]: Now when people speak of conformity in academia, I think, you know, you can at one level take
[Guest]: the most egregious examples of woke politics.
[Guest]: And certainly there's a lot more of that these days.
[Guest]: But I think it is, one has to say, I think, a fact, and probably a progressive fact or
[Guest]: productive fact, that almost all moral theories have to operate within a broad plateau of
[Guest]: freedom and egalitarianism, at least moral egalitarianism, right?
[Guest]: So often when people complain that there's conformity, and I think, you know, what they
[Guest]: want to say is that there are certain kinds of hierarchical conceptions of our relations
[Guest]: to each other that are no longer considered socially acceptable, right?
[Guest]: So for example, I mean, you obviously can't defend racism and caste in the way you do,
[Guest]: and often there's a passive aggressive way of re-articulating them in a kind of different
[Guest]: language, right, in which you can play victim, right?
[Guest]: So to the extent that there are certain core moral propositions of that kind, and those
[Guest]: have to be exhibited in the way in which you treat and respect people, those will be the
[Guest]: basis for, I would say, a certain kind of conformity, because those are the basic elements
[Guest]: of that social contract, right?
[Guest]: That's what gives predictability, you know, so for example, freedom of expression, right?
[Guest]: Ideally should just be that, that it's a core norm that all of us respect, and none of us
[Guest]: sort of, you know, violate.
[Guest]: Now often what happens with freedom of expression is all sides weaponize it, right, in the sense
[Guest]: that it's a convenient tool when you want to use it for your side, it's inconvenient
[Guest]: when you want to extend the same courtesy in some senses to other people, right?
[Guest]: So that kind of, I think, building off a little bit of a consensus, okay, what are these moral
[Guest]: baseline values, I think is important.
[Guest]: I'll just give you one example, I think, which is illustrative of this.
[Guest]: So I've used this example often, but because it's so vivid, in this context, it might make
[Guest]: sense.
[Guest]: So, you know, I often used to get this criticism, and I'm sure you've heard it many times that
[Guest]: liberalism and libertarianism and all of these nice things that you guys talk about are basically
[Guest]: foreign imports, right?
[Guest]: These are ideologies born in the West, they might not have applicability in India.
[Guest]: And I remember once having this conversation with a group of members of parliament from
[Guest]: all across the political spectrum, and some very strident ones who, the context was private,
[Guest]: so they were having a no holds barred discussion, each had their own victim narratives.
[Guest]: And in the course of that conversation, I just happened to ask them this question, I
[Guest]: said, can all of you recount an instance where you resented something, because it had been
[Guest]: imposed on you without your consent?
[Guest]: It could be in a familial context, you know, your parents asked you to do things that you
[Guest]: did not agree to doing.
[Guest]: It could be in a political context, you were asked to conform to a law that you did not
[Guest]: agree with, right?
[Guest]: And how did you react to that?
[Guest]: And most of us, well, sometimes we have to go along, but that sense of resentment is
[Guest]: quite powerful.
[Guest]: Often, in fact, some of them said we resent things just because we are being forced to
[Guest]: do it, even if we agree with that, right?
[Guest]: And it struck me then that actually all that liberalism requires is an extending of that
[Guest]: courtesy to everybody else, right?
[Guest]: That very elemental experience that all of us have of feeling resentful if we are being
[Guest]: coerced.
[Guest]: If you could just extend that courtesy that maybe others are feeling that way as well.
[Guest]: I said, that's all it takes to get liberalism off the ground, you're actually all liberals
[Guest]: when it comes to yourself, right?
[Guest]: You all want to claim those freedoms.
[Guest]: Just extend that courtesy, extend that courtesy not just to other groups, but importantly,
[Guest]: groups need to extend that courtesy to individuals within it, right?
[Guest]: So groups will often say, minorities will often say, majorities will often say, please
[Guest]: don't impose a particular set of norms on us, right?
[Guest]: Well, extend that same courtesy to individuals within that group, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think you have to kind of link it back to a certain kind of moral
[Guest]: psychology.
[Guest]: And that was, I think, again, one of the interesting things about Adam Smith, that at the heart
[Guest]: of liberalism was a certain kind of moral psychology, right?
[Guest]: If you've ever experienced this elemental resentment, and you can extend the courtesy
[Guest]: of understanding that others might be feeling the same, you're on your way to being liberal.
[Guest]: And it's nonsense to say that the West always had it or we don't have it.
[Guest]: We just need to be a little bit more self conscious about it.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a big question, which I'd save for later in the podcast, but I'll bring it
[Amit Varma]: up now.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, a quick observation that you know, it often strikes me that all ideological
[Amit Varma]: differences really come down to differences about means, you know, the ends we can agree
[Amit Varma]: on, we all agree that, you know, nobody should be poor, that, you know, we should find ways
[Amit Varma]: of doing something about the genetic lottery, and sort of equal opportunities for all, and
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah, we all kind of agree on that the disagreements are about means.
[Amit Varma]: And what I would say, you know, everything that you just said, they use the word liberal,
[Amit Varma]: one could just as well in modern times, because liberal means so many things to so many people
[Amit Varma]: use the word libertarian, because this is also sort of a spiel that I, you know, give
[Amit Varma]: my friends of all ideological persuasions that no matter what ideology you profess to
[Amit Varma]: believe in your personal life, you're libertarian, if you go out for a meal with a friend, you
[Amit Varma]: won't force her to, you know, eat what you're eating, you won't force her to pay, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But then, you know, what is sort of natural to us in our in the personal domain, that
[Amit Varma]: coercion is bad and consent is important.
[Amit Varma]: We suddenly forget about it when we abstract it out to a bigger domain.
[Amit Varma]: But this observation itself might be completely moot.
[Amit Varma]: If my next question has any sort of sense to it, which is that what I have sort of been
[Amit Varma]: thinking about over the last few years, watching what's happening in the world around us, both
[Amit Varma]: in the US and in India, is that I've been wondering how much ideology is about ideas
[Amit Varma]: and how much it is about tribalism, for example, you mentioned that politics begins with disagreements.
[Amit Varma]: Now, many of those disagreements might on the surface of it be about ideas, but to what
[Amit Varma]: extent are those ideas, you know, not causes, but pretexts to sort of use a phrasing that
[Amit Varma]: you've used in one of your pieces in another different context, which I've picked it up
[Amit Varma]: from there.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I look at the US, and I see what Donald Trump has done to the Republican Party,
[Amit Varma]: where people who would call themselves conservative, five years ago, are, you know, have become
[Amit Varma]: anything but, they have completely been transformed by circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in India, you know, one of our mutual friends, Suyash Rai, once said something
[Amit Varma]: very interesting to me after demonetization, we were both kind of cribbing about how it,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the damage that it caused.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope you won't mind me quoting this private conversation, but he basically said
[Amit Varma]: ki yaar Amit mujhe communist se dar nahi lagta hai, mujhe classical liberal se dar lagta
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: And what he meant by that was that so many people who call themselves classical liberal
[Amit Varma]: and said, oh, we supported Modi in 2014, for, you know, more free markets and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: were completely forgetting the principles that they once professed allegiance to, and
[Amit Varma]: completely forgetting all of those principles now that they had chosen a tribe and what
[Amit Varma]: seems to happen, have happened with many people like that here, what seems to have happened
[Amit Varma]: with, you know, say, Republicans in the US, and really what seems to be happening with
[Amit Varma]: people across all stripes, is that I am more and more coming to the conclusion that ideology
[Amit Varma]: is kind of contingent, which is why, you know, within academia, you'll have, you know, pressures
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, becoming someone with a much more leftward tilt, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, deep down, it's something else, you're choosing a tribe to belong to, you're
[Amit Varma]: adopting that ideology, but you don't really give a damn about the principles like again,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you said just now that you spoke about how liberals, you know, treat freedom
[Amit Varma]: of speech is something contingent again, where, you know, they'll invoke it when it's, you
[Amit Varma]: know, for example, there are liberals in India who, who, you know, when the right wing uses
[Amit Varma]: certain laws against him, like sedition or 295A or whatever, they'll say, oh, horrible
[Amit Varma]: laws, but they have no issues using 295A themselves when they want to, you know, for example,
[Amit Varma]: all the vicarious thrill that was there on Twitter and social media when Anup Goswami
[Amit Varma]: was sort of prosecuted recently for laws we should not exist, right, and which liberals
[Amit Varma]: agree should not exist.
[Amit Varma]: So my deeper sort of concern there is, and I'm sure you've thought about it is that to
[Amit Varma]: what extent is ideology, therefore, contingent, and all of this is just a sham, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and if that is the case, if at the heart of this is a kind of tribalism, which we choose
[Amit Varma]: to dress up in different ways, then you know, what is the point of this whole political
[Amit Varma]: project?
[Guest]: Wow, really big question, probably sort of meandering, meandering to it, I think, two
[Guest]: or three different angles, right?
[Guest]: So one is, I think we have to be clear about the sense in which ideology matters, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so there's, there's a couple of technical meanings of the term ideology, where it just
[Guest]: doesn't refer to just ideas people have.
[Guest]: I mean, I do think there is, for example, I think some analytical power to Marx's conception
[Guest]: of ideology, right, where in a sense, what ideology does is it defines the horizons within
[Guest]: which we think.
[Guest]: So in a capitalist order, you cannot think outside of the horizons of competition and
[Guest]: private property, right?
[Guest]: And in that sense, I think there's a certain kind of power to that system that all differences
[Guest]: apart, that's a core institution of the society that in some senses permeates, you know, everything's
[Guest]: right or wrong is a different matter, but, you know, to that extent, I think many would
[Guest]: argue ideology still matters.
[Guest]: In fact, ideology often matters precisely when it's not most clearly articulated.
[Guest]: That's actually its power.
[Guest]: But I think coming more directly to your question, I do think there is something about a social
[Guest]: science vocabulary that has, I think, narrowed our horizons of politics, I think, immensely.
[Guest]: And again, that's something that was quite remarkable about Smith, and, you know, if
[Guest]: you read David Hume's History of England, for example, right?
[Guest]: We always used to set this exam question for students, that the key to a political thinker
[Guest]: is not his arguments or her arguments, the key to a political thinker is trying to figure
[Guest]: out what do they fear most, right?
[Guest]: And at that level, politics operates at a deeply psychological level, right?
[Guest]: Those who fear anarchy, right?
[Guest]: And that's a fear about the world, that's not a fear about abstract ideas.
[Guest]: Yes, in principle, we all want to be libertarian, or we all want to be actually, frankly, I
[Guest]: wouldn't mind an anarchist world where all authority was completely spontaneously generated,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Yet, temperamentally, you fear that world, either because you think it's not possible
[Guest]: or because you think, in some senses, it'll put you in jeopardy in ways you can't imagine,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Those who fear, I mean, classically, right, the fear of equality has come from two sources.
[Guest]: It has either come from a fear of existing groups losing privilege, right?
[Guest]: That's been the sort of almost always the classical thing, we just don't ask these questions
[Guest]: where we got our wealth from, right?
[Guest]: Or secondly, I think, you know, particularly in the 19th century, the fear of equality
[Guest]: was the fear of conformity, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that's the fear that runs through Mill and Tocqueville, and so forth, that actually
[Guest]: goes back to Plato in some ways, right?
[Guest]: That somehow, what particular interpretations of equality will do is license a kind of conformity,
[Guest]: it will disable or disempower the individual, right?
[Guest]: Because equality will unleash the thought that one opinion is as good as any other.
[Guest]: And if one opinion is as good as any other, the paradoxical psychological thought it unleashes
[Guest]: is that I then take my cues from people who have the more numbers, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of actually politics is actually trying to figure out what those fears are
[Guest]: in a colonial context, right?
[Guest]: I think Jawaharlal Nehru's poignant description, most people did not agree with Gandhi's ideas.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think there was ever a congressman who was a Gandhian in any deep sense.
[Guest]: What he did tap into, right?
[Guest]: Was in a sense, exposing that fear we had, and finding a vocabulary in which to express
[Guest]: it and confront it, right?
[Guest]: I think you can see this on debates over secularism and religion, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I think a lot of our fears about religion in public sphere are frankly psychological.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, you know, you just associate religion with the fact that if you actually
[Guest]: raise the stakes of politics, it's true that you might make better people, but it's also
[Guest]: true that you could end up licensing worse evil.
[Guest]: So I actually do think, and a lot of successful politicians, frankly, I think their big trait
[Guest]: is kind of instinctively grasping, or sometimes creating these fears in some ways, right?
[Guest]: What do I need to make you afraid of?
[Guest]: And if I can, you know, give an answer to that fear, right?
[Guest]: So that's, I think, one thing.
[Guest]: You can even see it in debates in India, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I think, I'm sure one of the questions that, you know, you have thought about deeply,
[Guest]: you know, when we ask this question, why isn't the Indian state more liberal?
[Guest]: Why haven't libertarian ideas taken hold?
[Guest]: Behind it often is not the cogency of the argument.
[Guest]: Behind it often is the social experience of distrust, right?
[Guest]: Imagine 1947, right?
[Guest]: I mean, India has experienced a sort of century of low growth.
[Guest]: There are no markets.
[Guest]: The only forms of capital that you have actually experienced are usurous forms of capital,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That, you know, the money, the local money lender that exploits you.
[Guest]: What kind of imagination does that create about markets, right?
[Guest]: And you're overcoming, and that's where experience does matter.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't want to sort of fetishize experience.
[Guest]: And often it's very irritating when somebody says, look, my experience against your argument.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, well, sometimes you can misread your own experience.
[Guest]: Nevertheless, I think experience is important because it does point us in the right direction,
[Guest]: which is, and I think those conversations are harder to have.
[Guest]: Frankly, the argumentative conversations are easier to have.
[Guest]: Here are the three best arguments for the difference principle, or, you know, here are
[Guest]: the three best arguments for why the price mechanism is a wonderful information aggregating
[Guest]: mechanism.
[Guest]: It's harder to convince people who've actually never seen that work, right?
[Guest]: What does that mean?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, who might benefit from this?
[Guest]: And I think that, I think, is probably to me the core of politics, as Hobbes rightly
[Guest]: said, you know, is support of the state was also, you know, fear and I were born twins.
[Guest]: I mean, he literally made fear itself that category, right?
[Guest]: But in all kinds of other ways, I think asking this question, what do people fear most?
[Guest]: I think is often an, it's an instructive question, even if it's not an easy question to answer.
[Guest]: Because often those fears are unrecognized, even by the people who are actually exhibiting
[Guest]: them in, you know, in some ways.
[Guest]: The second thing I'd say about politics, and again, going back to the category of the imagination
[Guest]: in some ways, right, you know, I frankly, I have to say, the political science is completely
[Guest]: mystified by a very basic question of political science, what makes for credible leaders?
[Guest]: I mean, the kinds of leaders people give their allegiance to sometimes in the face of incontrovertible
[Guest]: evidence that they are incompetent, you know, sort of boggles the mind.
[Guest]: Because in a sense, the reverse is the case.
[Guest]: I mean, I think, intellectuals are particularly, I think, prone to misrecognizing leaders,
[Guest]: partly because we are good at reading arguments, we are not good at reading human nature, we
[Guest]: are not good at reading the protean-ness of people, in some ways, right?
[Guest]: You know, which is why I think there is always this gap.
[Guest]: I mean, I think it can be a good faith mistake.
[Guest]: Sometimes you think a particular leader or a particular political party might actually
[Guest]: carry out your agenda.
[Guest]: You're probably projecting, in some senses, your arguments, you know, onto them.
[Guest]: But in thinking about the elements of leadership, right, I think that point about vicariousness,
[Guest]: I think actually becomes important.
[Guest]: There are some leaders who produce a kind of affect, you know, which makes people feel
[Guest]: elevated.
[Guest]: I mean, there's always this temptation to say, yes, I know he's committing a crime,
[Guest]: but at least it's a crime in the cause of greatness.
[Guest]: There are other leaders who are completely truthful and matter-of-fact, but that's precisely
[Guest]: the point, which is, they are boring.
[Guest]: I mean, by the way, the Scottish Enlightenment used to think boredom was as good an explanation
[Guest]: of social change as anything, often that, you know, something too familiar breeds contempt.
[Guest]: We need to be jostled out.
[Guest]: So you know, politics, and then there's, of course, interests, which should never be discounted.
[Guest]: Everybody wants to risk, even, under most circumstances.
[Guest]: I think most of us are natural Pareto optimists, which is, show me an outcome which shows me,
[Guest]: which guarantees me that I'll not be worse off here and now, right?
[Guest]: So politics, in a sense, works in the kind of deep crucible of, you know, the variety
[Guest]: of human nature.
[Guest]: And I think one of the mistakes of contemporary social science is to reduce that expansive
[Guest]: vocabulary of moral psychology, which the 18th century had, which some of our texts
[Guest]: like the Mahabharata have, you know, pride, vanity, jealousy, envy, resentment, you know,
[Guest]: vicarious elevation.
[Guest]: These are all not things that can simply be captured by or reduced either to interest
[Guest]: or to ideas, you know, in some ways.
[Guest]: I mean, sometimes you might change your mind just because your friend has done better on
[Guest]: a particular idea, which you might have agreed with, I mean, you know, as a great line from
[Guest]: Phoenix goes, you know, when a friend fails, it hurts, when he comes first, it hurts even
[Guest]: more, right?
[Guest]: So I think that moral psychology, I think, is much more central to politics than we think.
[Guest]: And the tribalism that you're pointing out, I think, comes from that, right?
[Guest]: I mean, what are these tribal instincts?
[Guest]: I want my side to win or lose is more important, because the thrill of winning or losing is
[Guest]: more important than what we will achieve.
[Guest]: Often that tribalism is a cloaked form of making an argument that you could not make
[Guest]: straightforwardly in moral terms.
[Guest]: So when you think of ethnic nationalism, for example, right?
[Guest]: Majorities-minority complexes, right?
[Guest]: A white majority thinking that it's going to lose, in a sense, its cultural supremacy.
[Guest]: It's an unstated fear.
[Guest]: You actually can't state it in moral terms.
[Guest]: In that sense, we are operating within a, you know, a moral horizon of freedom and equality.
[Guest]: And so you then kind of re-articulate it in roundabout ways, right?
[Guest]: And behind a lot of that tribalism is exactly that fear.
[Amit Varma]: So lots to unpack there again.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before we, you know, get down to talking about India, and you know, how we fared in
[Amit Varma]: the 73 years, which is, of course, the theme of this episode, a small observation and a
[Amit Varma]: big observation, and I'll ask you to react to them.
[Amit Varma]: And the small observation is really just sort of elaborating on what you said about horizons.
[Amit Varma]: There's this great book by Arnold Kling called The Three Languages of Politics, where he
[Amit Varma]: talks about how, you know, one of the reasons why we are so polarized is that we are always
[Amit Varma]: talking past each other, never to each other.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we are talking past each other, because, you know, progressives, conservatives
[Amit Varma]: and libertarians, as it were, will have a different set of horizons and first principles
[Amit Varma]: that they look at.
[Amit Varma]: Progressives will care about equality, conservatives about tradition, libertarians about freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you can talk about exactly the same thing and argue for an hour and you're
[Amit Varma]: not addressing each other at all, you're just talking into the air.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a book I'd recommend for my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: My other sort of observation from, you know, all of what you were saying is that it has
[Amit Varma]: often seemed to me that the great battle in our civilization over the last 200-300 years
[Amit Varma]: since the Enlightenment is that through our culture, we are figuring out ways to mitigate
[Amit Varma]: our hardwiring, using nurture to sort of mitigate nature.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes, of course, a lot of the time, culture, nurture reinforces nature, but sometimes
[Amit Varma]: it mitigates that.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, we are hardwired to think the world in zero-sum ways, because we are,
[Amit Varma]: you know, our instincts were formed in times where we lived in small tribes, and there
[Amit Varma]: was scarcity and whatever, we think the world in zero-sum ways, we think in tribal ways,
[Amit Varma]: we have a distrust of the other to play to the sort of the theme of fear, which you were
[Amit Varma]: talking about.
[Amit Varma]: We admire strong leaders, which is why I think, you know, you were talking about a great mystery
[Amit Varma]: of political science, what makes for a credible leader.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one of the things we are hardwired to is look for macho posturing, look for that
[Amit Varma]: kind of signaling, which is why, you know, a Trump or Modi will do well.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, through our culture, we also, you know, we are that unique species, which can
[Amit Varma]: actually fight its hardwiring, in a sense, through culture.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a whole battle.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that because intellectuals are in a sort of an ivory tower, where they
[Amit Varma]: don't have to engage with the real world so much, and politicians do, I think politicians
[Amit Varma]: get human nature much better, which is why politicians might often use ideology to cloak
[Amit Varma]: the things they do or what they want to happen.
[Amit Varma]: But they get these primal fears, they know how to exploit them, it's instinctive, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what you sort of spoke about, you know, experience versus argument.
[Amit Varma]: So they have that experience of human nature, their incentives are tailored towards acknowledging
[Amit Varma]: human nature, and, you know, catering for it, while, you know, intellectuals within
[Amit Varma]: the academy, for example, might not have those same kind of incentives, their incentives
[Amit Varma]: might be to signal something to their peers, and not to actually make an impact in the
[Amit Varma]: real world.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it strikes me that any intellectual who really cares about her ideas, almost therefore,
[Amit Varma]: is forced to simultaneously become an activist, because otherwise, your ideas have no impact.
[Amit Varma]: There's no question at the end of this, I'm just sort of thinking aloud, taking off from
[Amit Varma]: what you said.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, how would you sort of kind of react to this?
[Guest]: No, you know, you said actually something quite important.
[Guest]: And I want to just kind of build on that, particularly on the role of a politician.
[Guest]: I mean, to me, politicians have two qualities, which often academics don't, or at least,
[Guest]: at least academics who have been professionalized, I think, in the cultures of professionalization
[Guest]: that we now produce in some ways, right?
[Guest]: I think a lot of the great 19th century thinkers did in some ways, it's quite remarkable how
[Guest]: much they did, I think, the two qualities are one, as you said, which is the difference
[Guest]: between being good at arguments versus actually being able to observe human beings, read as
[Guest]: it were the text of human life and actual live living beings, you know, to decipher
[Guest]: what Kant called the crooked timber of humanity, right?
[Guest]: So I think that's one.
[Guest]: The second thing, and I think this is the most important thing about politicians to
[Guest]: me, and why they are absolutely indispensable, is that the politician's central job is a
[Guest]: job of kind of social mediation.
[Guest]: The example that you just read, you may like liberty more, I may like equality more, we
[Guest]: may disagree about the means.
[Guest]: Now somebody has to mediate between us, by mediate meaning, create enough structures
[Guest]: of cooperation that, you know, we don't kill each other, but hopefully, despite these differences
[Guest]: can do collectively things together, right?
[Guest]: And often what people think of as a vice in politicians, which is they're swaying to public
[Guest]: opinion, politicians can do U-turns quite easily.
[Guest]: I think in terms of the vocation, that's exactly what you want them to do.
[Guest]: I mean, I would be very afraid of a politician who just says it's my way or the highway.
[Guest]: I mean, I want a politician to have some core baseline moral values, right?
[Guest]: And that's at a very kind of high level of constitutional abstraction, okay?
[Guest]: I don't use violence, I don't use coercion.
[Guest]: But beyond that, precisely because of the variousness of human nature, the variousness
[Guest]: of our histories, and the differences in ideas, no society could function if you did not have
[Guest]: somebody doing this job of social mediation, which is why I am actually, I mean, I'm very,
[Guest]: very clear that if intellectuals enter politics, they should enter as politicians.
[Guest]: I think the idea that, you know, you're carrying some special authority into that realm because
[Guest]: you're an intellectual, I think is just preposterous.
[Guest]: You're just another citizen, and you need to take on the role of a politician, not that
[Guest]: of an intellectual.
[Guest]: The point you made about, I think, activism, I think, is an important one, I think, because
[Guest]: that's often the form in which now, I think, intellectual engagement engages with the public
[Guest]: sphere, right?
[Guest]: And there also, I think, I would actually, I think, make a distinction, which is it is
[Guest]: an intellectual's job, I think, to state how they see the world as clearly as it is, without
[Guest]: fear or favor.
[Guest]: And in a sense, that's their biggest social role, but they should offer it in the spirit
[Guest]: that once you have made an argument in public, it is just one argument amongst any, I mean,
[Guest]: I'm not a big fan of claiming authority in politics, because partly that militates against
[Guest]: the principle of equality, that militates against the idea of legitimacy.
[Guest]: But yes, I mean, given that we have the luxury, somebody has given the time and, you know,
[Guest]: is paying us to read books, can we advance a few more arguments that, you know, other
[Guest]: people might not have had time to, but you should not do it with the expectation that
[Guest]: you will win.
[Guest]: In fact, I think the best you can offer is a well-thought-out provocation.
[Guest]: Have you thought of this?
[Guest]: You know, that way that Hindi song goes, I think that's the core job in the sense of
[Guest]: an intellectual.
[Guest]: I think when you become an activist, I think there are two kinds.
[Guest]: One where there are certain core values that I think intellectuals do want to defend, right?
[Guest]: So you might be an activist in the cause of free speech.
[Guest]: You might be an academic constitutional lawyer, you know, who's working on environmental regulation
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: That kind of activism, I think, is compatible with the academic vocation.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just an extension of the good faith arguments you're making.
[Guest]: What is, I think, not compatible with academic vocation is that you want your group or your
[Guest]: side to win.
[Guest]: And that group becomes, you know, it's the danger of any form of collective power.
[Guest]: Again, as Adam Smith reminded us, it takes a life of its own, right?
[Guest]: Just because I was with you in a trade union, just because I was with you on this particular
[Guest]: cause, actually that solidarity then begins to trump, as it were, the commitment to truth.
[Guest]: And to that extent, I think intellectuals do have to remain detached from collective
[Guest]: organizational forms.
[Guest]: I mean, I do think it's running a risk once they say, we've become part of this organization
[Guest]: or that organization.
[Guest]: Or, you know, it's even the danger, for example, in these collective letters that academics
[Guest]: write a lot, you know, where you have to get everybody on a common platform.
[Guest]: But getting everybody on that common platform is exactly the kind of exercise or a loss
[Guest]: of your independence, right?
[Guest]: Now, in some cases, those are necessary, obviously, if your colleagues are being arrested on trumped
[Guest]: up charges, maybe you do want to come together, some kind of solidarity.
[Guest]: But I do think intellectuals need to be wary of all forms of power, including the power
[Guest]: of intermediate collectivities of which they are part.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, when you said that, when I sort of phrased that thing about, you know, intellectuals,
[Amit Varma]: if they want their ideas to have an impact or force to be activists, I think I meant
[Amit Varma]: activists in a really broad sense, which includes politics.
[Amit Varma]: And the thought that strikes me there is that, that process of trying to engage with the
[Amit Varma]: real world, even if you enter into that process with the intent of furthering your ideas,
[Amit Varma]: and you're driven by your ideas, ultimately, you have to cater to interests and leave ideas
[Amit Varma]: aside, which is why I often say that politics corrodes character, you once you are in politics,
[Amit Varma]: you sort of the compromises you make along the way changes who you are, if you were that
[Amit Varma]: person to begin with, because we are all so self delusional that, you know, who knows?
[Amit Varma]: So So yeah, that's, that's sort of,
[Guest]: Can I take issue with you slightly?
[Guest]: I mean, I understand what you're saying.
[Guest]: And I think I think as an empirical description of politics is right.
[Guest]: But but I think the very trait that you're describing also makes politics the toughest
[Guest]: in the highest vocation.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the kind of politician who can both socially mediate, understand difference,
[Guest]: understand the complexities of power, and yet retain something of a core compass, right,
[Guest]: that all of this mediation is in the service of, I mean, it's a very rare politician, right.
[Guest]: But but that's what actually makes politics the most difficult job, I think of any, precisely
[Guest]: because you, in a sense, have to, you know, keep both sides of that, right, that at one
[Guest]: level, you are not a creature of your own will.
[Guest]: That's part of your job is to respond to other people, right.
[Guest]: And yet, you have to have a certain kind of moral compass and core, core with it.
[Guest]: So we need to encourage politicians of those kinds.
[Guest]: I mean, I, I would hate to end this conversation with cynicism about politics, because if you
[Guest]: think it's indispensable, I think we do need to ask, you know, what kinds of characters
[Guest]: are better suited to the kinds of politics you want?
[Amit Varma]: No, no, in fact, I love your description of politics.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fairly obvious that politicians are necessary.
[Amit Varma]: Like if they didn't exist, we would have to invent them.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know, it is contentious whether intellectuals are necessary.
[Amit Varma]: But but can you name any politicians like that who you think retain their integrity
[Amit Varma]: in the face of pressures which would force others to compromise?
[Guest]: Oh, it's, it's, you know, it's, it's a tough one.
[Guest]: And the reason I'm hesitating, because I think it does say I think something contempt, something
[Guest]: about the contemporary moment as well, right, which is, and how we, in a sense, judge people,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So one of the things that makes politics hard, I think, at this moment, and has probably
[Guest]: also paved the way for a certain kind of populism, authoritarianism, fascism, is this kind of
[Guest]: interesting asymmetry between truth and doubt, or credibility and lack of credibility.
[Guest]: And what I mean by the asymmetry is this, which is, in order for cynicism to win, or
[Guest]: in order for us to pull down somebody, all you need to do is find one flaw, right?
[Guest]: Obama got Libya wrong, right?
[Guest]: It's quite, it's kind of no brainer, easy to say that, right?
[Guest]: Or maybe Obama got Syria wrong, right?
[Guest]: So the standard by which you can actually show that the politician was not true to his
[Guest]: core principles, it's a very low bar, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we're all fallible human beings, right?
[Guest]: And I think one of the peculiarities of this moment is that, on the one hand, almost any
[Guest]: politician will be destroyed by that skepticism very easily.
[Guest]: I mean, it just takes like, one instance, oh, you said this when you were 17 years old,
[Guest]: there you go, right?
[Guest]: For your detractors, that's enough, right?
[Guest]: And I think it's that fact that has also paved the way for its complete opposite, where the
[Guest]: only way in which you can hold on to a belief in politician is complete blind faith, right?
[Guest]: It's the flip side of the same coin, right, which is, you just go in and say, look, I'm
[Guest]: going to be completely impervious to the facts here.
[Guest]: You know, as one of my colleagues, Nilanjan Sarkar, has written, the politics of vishwas
[Guest]: in some ways, right?
[Guest]: I've given my faith to this person, come what may, they said red is blue, red is blue, they
[Guest]: say two plus two equals five, and I think both of these are two sides of the same coin.
[Guest]: So when we judge politicians, I think one of the things we have to, I think, be more
[Guest]: conscious of that it is an art and it is something that requires the hard historical work of
[Guest]: political judgment.
[Guest]: In a sense, a moral indictment of a politician is easy, right?
[Guest]: It's the easiest route to moralize about.
[Guest]: But what does political judgment mean?
[Guest]: Which is, how would you rate their capacity to make decisions in the face of all this
[Guest]: complexity?
[Guest]: Not just complexity, but the fact that you actually don't know, I mean, you know, if
[Guest]: Obama says I veer more leftward on healthcare, do I jeopardize the possibility of even passing
[Guest]: a moderate package?
[Guest]: How could anybody know what that possibility looks like, right?
[Guest]: So I don't think we have the kind of appropriate kind of conversation about what those standards
[Guest]: of judgment should be.
[Guest]: And which is why I was hesitating that, you know, I can think of any name, I can put out
[Guest]: a name and, you know, I think it will be immediately clear to most people that, you know, here
[Guest]: are the three flaws, here are the three big mistakes, you know, so and so, so made.
[Guest]: And so in that sense, you know, I think it's coming to our debates, for example, about
[Guest]: Nehru, for example, about Modi, for example.
[Guest]: Of course, Nehru had deep flaws, I mean, you know, you and I can recount lots and lots
[Guest]: of political instances, sometimes even constitutional instances.
[Guest]: But is the life judged as a whole, right, where the sense is that, despite these mistakes,
[Guest]: the movement is in a sense towards a particular constitutional and democratic sensibility.
[Guest]: You know, I think he's probably done as good as any democratic statesman has in some senses
[Guest]: done.
[Guest]: You can think of Roosevelt.
[Guest]: At one level, it's very easy to indict Roosevelt, I mean, his entire New Deal was founded on
[Guest]: a very sordid compromise with the racism of Southern Democrats.
[Guest]: You know, he left that structure of racism in the South intact.
[Guest]: But what's the counterfactual here, right?
[Guest]: If he had pushed too hard on that, would anything have been possible at all?
[Guest]: So I think we need a much more nuanced historical conversation.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, we probably need a few historians in the room to work it out, you know, come
[Guest]: to fair judgment.
[Guest]: So what might be interesting politicians to look for?
[Amit Varma]: No, you know, I didn't mean my comment on sort of politicians not being true to an ideology
[Amit Varma]: as an indictment of any sort.
[Amit Varma]: I totally understand, you know, the imperatives of politics and the importance of politics
[Amit Varma]: and the role that great politicians have played.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the point you made about Nehru is well taken that people contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And in our modern times, sadly, we, you know, try to look for simplistic binaries to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, discuss everything with and those simply don't work.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is an Independence Day special episode, we are supposed to talk about India, and we've
[Amit Varma]: spent more than an hour entirely my fault, because I love digressing.
[Guest]: I think it's a feature.
[Guest]: We are talking about India.
[Guest]: All this is about India, right?
[Guest]: In a different form.
[Amit Varma]: I'll wait in a different form.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And after we come back, we'll actually get down to the brass tacks of our independence.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive some games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India, and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties for every product you buy, win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaydeep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indian colors.com as colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right on scene for 15% off at Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen I'm chatting with Pratap Bhanu Mehta.
[Amit Varma]: This is our Independence Day special episode in the year 2020 in case you're listening
[Amit Varma]: in to this in 2050 because I keep telling my listeners that I am trying to create episodes
[Amit Varma]: for the listeners of 30 years later.
[Amit Varma]: So please don't be offended if you're listening to this in the present moment.
[Amit Varma]: You know, let's what has always kind of fascinated me, you know, we look back at history with
[Amit Varma]: the hindsight bias and we think that okay, this is what India is it was inevitable that
[Amit Varma]: we would turn out like this that we would be this kind of democracy and we'd have this
[Amit Varma]: kind of constitution.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's something that we need to keep revisiting because as you've yourself
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, very often, and you know, everything is so contingent, you have a district chain
[Amit Varma]: of contingent events happening and then suddenly, you know, here we are and it all seems inevitable
[Amit Varma]: in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: What I'd like to talk a bit about is, you know, the founding idea of India, like one
[Amit Varma]: of the sort of themes that I've explored over the last year and a half or so, and I've asked
[Amit Varma]: this question to many guests, and I'd be interested in knowing what your answer would be, is that
[Amit Varma]: at some level, it seems to me that our constitution is a relatively liberal constitution, I say
[Amit Varma]: relatively because obviously, it's not nearly as liberal as I would like it to be.
[Amit Varma]: In the classical sense, but it's a relatively liberal constitution, put together by an unelected
[Amit Varma]: liberal elite, and imposed upon an illiberal country.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, one, there is a dilemma of whether such an imposition can itself be
[Amit Varma]: called liberal in any way, if it is an imposition.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thought being, I mean, the couple of other parallel thoughts that then come
[Amit Varma]: up is that in today's moment, has politics finally caught up with society, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that our politics is finally reflecting the preferences of a majority of the people or
[Amit Varma]: what the culture really is like?
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, broadly, what are your sort of thoughts?
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, taking off from that, is it therefore, a liberal failure to not create
[Amit Varma]: a liberal culture?
[Amit Varma]: Because what often, you know, one of my favorite quotes, if I make merchandise for the show,
[Amit Varma]: I'll probably make a t shirt with that quote is by Andrew Breitbart, where he says, politics
[Unknown]: is downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is something that without, you know, making a value judgment on whether
[Amit Varma]: the conservatives are right, or the liberal elites are right, or whatever, forget the
[Amit Varma]: value judgment, but just, you know, should a society have a constitution that doesn't
[Amit Varma]: reflect what it is about?
[Amit Varma]: And is that the case to begin with?
[Guest]: What are your thoughts on all these?
[Guest]: Actually, the Andrew Breitbart's thought, actually, the RSS had grasped this way before.
[Guest]: That's one thing they're right about, actually.
[Guest]: So I mean, I'm tempted to say, how many hours do we have to answer this question, but it
[Guest]: has one shot at it.
[Guest]: And to answer it, if you allow me, let me broaden the frame a little bit, because one
[Guest]: of the, I think, frustrating things about thinking about India is, and this is something
[Guest]: we shared with the United States, you know, we often think we are sui generis, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, there's a particular distinctive Indian destiny that comes into it.
[Guest]: But I think a little bit of comparative perspective is, I think, very important to answering your
[Guest]: question, right?
[Guest]: And the way I put it in this way, which is, it depends how you tell the story of this
[Guest]: fine founding moment.
[Guest]: So I'd like to tell the story two ways, right?
[Guest]: One, look, we often forget that it is indeed very rare for constitutionalism to succeed.
[Guest]: 80 to 90% of constitutions that have been created since the 18th, 19th century actually
[Guest]: collapse very frequently.
[Guest]: I mean, we forget France went through 130, 140 odd years, so many different republics
[Guest]: before it's stabilized, maybe still not stabilized, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, I would not, I think, underestimate or be entirely cynical about that founding
[Guest]: moment.
[Guest]: And in that comparative perspective, it actually looks, doesn't look half bad as at least providing
[Guest]: a modicum of hope to proceed forward.
[Guest]: The second thing, and this is where I think the comparative perspective is, I think, the
[Guest]: most helpful, is let us ask the question, what are the sources of illiberalism that
[Guest]: jeopardize this constitutionalism?
[Guest]: I'll come about its legitimacy later.
[Guest]: I mean, whether it was passed by an unelected assembly or so forth.
[Guest]: And let me be a devil's advocate for a minute and say that, actually, I don't think India
[Guest]: is unique.
[Guest]: I don't think this narrative that the West was uniquely fitted to be liberal by the middle
[Guest]: of the 20th century, India is a traditional conservative society and not liberal.
[Guest]: I actually don't buy that narrative, to be very honest, and I don't buy it for two reasons.
[Guest]: One, the biggest source of challenge for liberalism, to be honest, globally, has not been the abstract
[Guest]: debates over freedom of expression, liberties, and so forth.
[Guest]: Those are incrementally advanced.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not clear that late 19th century England was any more liberal than in some
[Guest]: senses we are.
[Guest]: I mean, you still had to kind of sign the Confession Act for various things, right?
[Guest]: The real challenge to liberalism has been from nationalism.
[Guest]: And it's a very paradoxical challenge because at one level, the nation state is the political
[Guest]: form in which modern constitutionalism flourishes, right?
[Guest]: But the modern nation state requires a theory of membership.
[Guest]: Who belongs to this political community which we are trying to be liberal?
[Guest]: And the disquieting answer is that absolutely everywhere in the world, there is almost no
[Guest]: exception to this, has the answer to that question not been accompanied by serious forms
[Guest]: of exclusion and violence, right?
[Guest]: Most European nation states that we think of it now have kind of relatively homogenized
[Guest]: by the middle of the 19th century.
[Guest]: You know, the French expelled the Huguenots and the Protestants.
[Guest]: England kind of took care of the Catholics and the Jews.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, we've in a sense accomplished that exclusionary process.
[Guest]: The United States, right, of course, still hasn't accomplished that process.
[Guest]: If you look at the late 19th century, right, one of the most sobering facts is that every
[Guest]: single transition from empire to nation state, right, when the Habsburg Empire dissolves
[Guest]: into nation states, when the Ottoman Empire dissolves, when the British Empire dissolves,
[Guest]: not a single empire accomplishes that transition without incredible ethnic bloodshed and violence,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And to me, that is still, and even if you look at contemporary debates, you know, there's
[Guest]: an interesting paradox just today, right?
[Guest]: I mean, even as obdurated judges, Justice Arun Mishra has passed a judgment saying women
[Guest]: have to have equal rights and property, right?
[Guest]: You know, to that extent, you might say the constitutional promise of equality is actually
[Guest]: working out, and yet it's the same Supreme Court, right, which will absolutely excuse
[Guest]: anything in the name of nationalism, the bridging of civil liberties, right?
[Guest]: So to my mind, the single biggest source of liberalism that has haunted all liberal societies,
[Guest]: India is actually not an exception in that, right?
[Guest]: And that's an undertow even the West feels now.
[Guest]: You know, Michael Mann has this very powerful article, The Dark Side of Democracy, which
[Guest]: actually shows post-19th century how European nation states became more homogenized, and
[Guest]: in each case, accompanied by ethnic cleansing.
[Guest]: In fact, genocide as a category at some level is a product of a democratic imagination,
[Guest]: because you target people simply for being who they are, you know, because ethnic demography
[Guest]: matters to democracy, right?
[Guest]: Now, India's illiberalism, I would actually also argue, comes from not just nationalism,
[Guest]: that's one dimension of it, but also this unresolved dilemma in representative democracy,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the unresolved dilemma is this, which is, how is power going to be shared once you
[Guest]: institutionalize a democracy?
[Guest]: Now, there's one simple answer you can give, which I'm sure you and I would probably prefer,
[Guest]: which is, look, give everybody the equal vote, one person, one vote, have a constitution
[Guest]: that safeguards our basic rights, and, you know, on checks and balances, on with it.
[Guest]: But this solution has proven to be elusive in societies that begin to see themselves
[Guest]: as marked by ethnic or religious majorities and minorities, right?
[Guest]: Because again, going back to the fear, right, the fear of the minority is that the majority
[Guest]: is ethnically numerically preponderant, so it will exercise more power, even if you give
[Guest]: all these nice checks and balances, right?
[Guest]: And from 1857 onwards, and I think this leads into the rise of Hindutva as well, the big
[Guest]: debate in India was, how is representative power going to be organized?
[Guest]: We do, you know, almost 70-80 years of negotiations around these questions, right?
[Guest]: And particularly around the Hindu-Muslim cleavage, there's the Dalit representation story as
[Guest]: well, which we can talk about separately, but I think for the Indian purpose, I think
[Guest]: the Hindu-Muslim cleavage is the most important.
[Guest]: You try different solutions, right?
[Guest]: You say, look, there are certain issues on which we will give minorities the veto.
[Guest]: Well, if you do that, it sets up a majority backlash.
[Guest]: Why should minorities have veto in excess of their political power, right?
[Guest]: You try and create representative government compatible with different system of laws.
[Guest]: So you, you know, in fact, one of the things, if India had remained united, we probably
[Guest]: would have been a more conservative country.
[Guest]: Because the irony is that the most people who were in favor of a united India, the condition
[Guest]: of it being a united India, as Ambedkar pointed out, was that each community gets to govern
[Guest]: its own laws, right?
[Guest]: So from the Minto-Morlay reforms onwards, this constant question, right?
[Guest]: How will power be shared between Hindus and Muslims?
[Guest]: If you give the Muslims more protection that they feel they are adequate, you have a reaction
[Guest]: from the right that says, look, this is a betrayal of the principle of equality, right?
[Guest]: If you don't give them adequate protection, right, you obviously set up different kinds
[Guest]: of fears.
[Guest]: And the fact of the matter is that we never resolved that question.
[Guest]: And frankly, it could not have been resolved because I think that's true to that American
[Guest]: constitutionalism thrust, which is that once you pose the question in terms of a permanent
[Guest]: majority and minority, defined in ethnic terms, there is no solution to, there's no equilibrium
[Guest]: solution, right?
[Guest]: The only way you can overcome this is by saying there are no permanent majorities and minorities.
[Guest]: These are all contingent coalitions and so forth, right?
[Guest]: Now it's the failure of that negotiation, in part, right?
[Guest]: That's actually the backdrop of partition.
[Guest]: In political terms, there is, of course, a much more visceral ethnic and religious dimension
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: And often those ethnic and religious issues were tested, right?
[Guest]: Those become tests for the representative government, you know, if Congress wins in
[Guest]: UP, will it do Gau Raksha or not, right?
[Guest]: It's a majority testing its power and a minority fearing it.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think the failure of the Indian nationalist movement, while it did
[Guest]: a remarkable job on almost every other aspect, I think India was brilliant, for example,
[Guest]: in its thinking about the language question.
[Guest]: We did not take a ready-made European model saying that the language of the ruler and
[Guest]: the rule, the language of different provinces should be the same.
[Guest]: I think when it came to this particular cleavage, frankly, we could not buck the trend that
[Guest]: every other society has done, right?
[Guest]: And that's the trend that still casts a kind of shadow on contemporary politics, right?
[Guest]: You know, so to that extent, I mean, to me, India's constitution, the founding moment,
[Guest]: one should not forget that it happened in the shadow of partition.
[Guest]: It happened in the shadow of a massive failure of that nationalist project, which wanted
[Guest]: the strategic unity of the subcontinent, which thought that there was a traditional cultural
[Guest]: narrative of syncretism, right, that could actually overcome these religious divisions.
[Guest]: And they completely missed the fact that, and this is something I think we also miss
[Guest]: in contemporary discourse, that that traditional discourse of syncretism, even if it was only
[Guest]: imagined, right, could actually not work in the context of modern democratic realities,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Older forms of toleration don't require great social mobility.
[Guest]: We often don't compete for the same things.
[Guest]: Societies are segmented, hierarchical, right?
[Guest]: Now you're all competing for the same power.
[Guest]: In that same power, demography becomes important, right?
[Guest]: So why the census became such a political issue, why it's very important for the BJP,
[Guest]: the number of Hindus versus the number of Muslims, technically in a liberal society,
[Guest]: why should this even matter?
[Guest]: I mean, you don't care what your private religion is and what your private identity is, right?
[Guest]: So to that extent, I would argue that, you know, I don't think the story is as much simply
[Guest]: a straightforward story of there was a deeply liberal conservative society here.
[Guest]: I think the bulk of the problems actually came from aporias that are internal to liberal
[Guest]: democracy itself.
[Guest]: Now, there is a second way in which I think your narrative has something to it, which
[Guest]: is if you shift the frame from nationalism and the sharing of power between communities
[Guest]: to what we might call social conservatism, right?
[Guest]: India was a conservative society, but conservative, we simply mean in basic terms, which is more
[Guest]: and more individuals were governed by traditional norms of occupation, caste, identity, family,
[Guest]: and so forth, right?
[Guest]: Now one of the tasks of the modern state is the way it sets itself is to disembed individuals
[Guest]: from oppressive social structures of power, right?
[Guest]: And again, going back to the question, what do you fear more, the Indian state was founded
[Guest]: on the fear of social power, because social power, as Ambedkar said, meant caste.
[Guest]: Social power meant sort of patriarchal families, right?
[Guest]: Social power meant the power of, you know, ostracism, all those kinds of things.
[Guest]: Now, the Indian constitution, in part, promised that charter of reform, that slowly and gradually,
[Guest]: right, the most obvious place to do it was caste, temple entry, the abolition of untouchability.
[Guest]: But again, there are two different liberal approaches to this.
[Guest]: And I think, again, as liberals, I think we are torn about this, right?
[Guest]: One is what you might call a rationalist approach.
[Guest]: The rationalist approach says that every institution in society must look like or embody the basic
[Guest]: liberal norms that we expect in our constitution.
[Guest]: So you might say Article 14, 19, and 21 should govern every institution, right?
[Guest]: A temple is legitimate only if it doesn't discriminate or exclude, right?
[Guest]: A family is legitimate only if it treats people equally, right?
[Guest]: So that's the rationalist, where in a sense, all civic associations, intermediary sources
[Guest]: of power should also conform to liberal norms.
[Guest]: There's a second conception that's a little bit more pluralistic, that says that, look,
[Guest]: you know, these associations and these intermediate sources of power have complex histories, they're
[Guest]: expresses of people's identities, we may not like them, but they are part of, you might
[Guest]: say, a more basic freedom of association, right?
[Guest]: So if a church doesn't ordain women as priests, I mean, that's its business.
[Guest]: You know, if people want to go to temples that discriminate against women, that's their
[Guest]: business, right?
[Guest]: Now, in a way, what the Indian Constitution was, was a kind of compromise between these
[Guest]: two visions.
[Guest]: And actually, you can see the tension even in, for example, the Sabarimala judgment,
[Guest]: you know, in a sense, Hindu Malhotra's judgment, forget the religious argument for a minute,
[Guest]: in a way, it seems to be saying, look, why should every intermediate institution society
[Guest]: correspond to what you expect of public institutions, right?
[Guest]: Now the argument there is that, look, and this is your point about culture in some ways,
[Guest]: that your public opportunities are deeply structured by these private and civic associations
[Guest]: and institutions.
[Guest]: And it's obvious in the case of, for example, gender, I mean, right, if you can't imagine
[Guest]: in a patriarchal society, civic equality for women actually being realized, other than
[Guest]: an emotional sense.
[Guest]: The question is, in a sense, you know, how much do you want to use state power to create
[Guest]: this reform?
[Guest]: Or how much do you want to do the work of culture to do this?
[Guest]: And ideally, in a liberal society, you'll get that balance just right.
[Guest]: Because having a pure rationalist view does raise questions about the concentration of
[Guest]: power, you know, risks different kinds of liberties, right?
[Guest]: Now, what has happened, I think, interestingly, is that the reformists, right, the Congress
[Guest]: Party, once it acquired state power, it, in a sense, completely gave up that social work
[Guest]: of reform, which is what it had been doing as a nationalist movement, right?
[Guest]: You know, it now has state power, it doesn't need to do this stuff.
[Guest]: Interestingly, what's interesting about the Arnas is, in a sense, is that that's the space
[Guest]: it began to occupy, right, very, very powerfully, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's extraordinary how many so-called, quote unquote, progressive positions the BJP
[Guest]: has managed to appropriate, right?
[Guest]: Because what the Congress ended up doing slowly, I mean, obviously, in 1950, there was the
[Guest]: pressure of partition, it, in a sense, just became comfortable with a status quo, right?
[Guest]: I mean, why do we want to politicize any of this stuff, right?
[Guest]: So if, if Muslim personal law doesn't get reformed, that's fine, right?
[Guest]: You could have created a process of incremental reform.
[Guest]: And that reinforced the first dynamic about exclusion, because the competition then became
[Guest]: which communities does the state intervene in most, right?
[Guest]: That's part of the BJP narrative, that the state deprived the Hindus of their associational
[Guest]: rights, but it protected minority associational rights.
[Guest]: Now, I don't think the motives were sinister, I think the motives were just more a combination
[Guest]: of inertia and, you know, why spend political capital on this.
[Guest]: But it had that net effect, right?
[Guest]: So you know, to that extent, I think, again, the Indian Constitution is the trajectory
[Guest]: is no different.
[Guest]: I mean, let's not forget, right, Switzerland gave women the vote only in 1970.
[Guest]: That social work is, you know, it's going to be a long haul.
[Guest]: And to be honest, I am surprised.
[Guest]: You can look at it this way, which is that, yes, there is a lot of deep exclusionary practice
[Guest]: in civil society.
[Guest]: But at the normative level, it's very difficult for anybody to stand up and justify, right?
[Guest]: You know, in some ways, and that you have to say is an achievement, I think, of that
[Guest]: constitutional imagination, in some ways.
[Guest]: So I would submit that I, in comparative perspective, I don't think India looks terribly different,
[Guest]: actually.
[Guest]: I mean, this is part of the process of democratization and modernization.
[Guest]: And I think we are at this particular conjuncture where these two questions have come to the
[Guest]: fore again, right?
[Guest]: Despite possibility that the BJP is, in principle, and why a lot of Hindus support it, they actually
[Guest]: don't experience that authoritarianism, right, in relation to where they stand, right?
[Guest]: You know, but obviously, minorities will, you know, feel it.
[Guest]: And we've basically decided that, in some senses, we can create a national narrative
[Guest]: without giving minorities a place, sort of, you know, in it.
[Guest]: So I think that's a thing.
[Guest]: I'll just make one last comment.
[Guest]: I know this answer has been too long, which is much more of an empirical comment, and
[Guest]: in the spirit that you asked the question of thinking about counterfactuals.
[Guest]: So I often, in class, pose these two counterfactuals to students.
[Guest]: One is a counterfactual, let's say, in 1914, or 1915, somewhere in that decade.
[Guest]: The British just suddenly had a brainwave and decided to leave India.
[Guest]: We're quitting, you know, to hell with it, we don't want empire, right?
[Guest]: Would an Indian constitution have been possible, right, without that 30, 40 years of the kind
[Guest]: of social mobilization work that the nationalist movement did?
[Guest]: Actually creating an organizational form, right, that was, in a sense, appropriate to
[Guest]: the modern world.
[Guest]: Second counterfactual is, I think, the assassination of Gandhi, which is, if Gandhi had not been
[Guest]: assassinated and the RSS had not been temporarily delegitimized as a result, would the right-wing
[Guest]: challenge to Nehru in the 1950s have been even stronger than it was?
[Guest]: It was actually quite strong.
[Guest]: I mean, we underestimate how strong it was.
[Guest]: I mean, not just Karpatri Maharaj and the reform bill, but even within the Congress
[Guest]: Party, as you know.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, frankly, people like Govind Balampant and so forth are actually frightening
[Guest]: figures in the history of Indian communism, right?
[Guest]: And would the new republic then have, in a sense, been split, not being able to consolidate
[Guest]: enough power in a way that so many countries around the world have found themselves, right?
[Guest]: I think that's also an interesting counterfactual to think about.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to come back later to a version of the second counterfactual and we can talk
[Amit Varma]: more about that.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a lot to unpack.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of observations and questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is, you know, it's quite a stunning insight in a sense that genocide is incentivized by
[Amit Varma]: democracy because as you pointed out, and you in the past quoted Syed Ahmed Khan quoting
[Amit Varma]: John Stuart Mill talking about how democracy is all about demography, you know, the potency
[Amit Varma]: of the terms majority and minority would not matter anywhere except in a democracy because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it is so critical there.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, one thought that strikes me then is that in any democracy is
[Amit Varma]: this kind of majoritarianism politics inevitable at some point.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of threads I want to unpack is that, you know, one of the sort of conflicts
[Amit Varma]: at the start, which I don't think we quite figured out either way, is with regards to
[Amit Varma]: the constitution that what is the aim of the constitution?
[Amit Varma]: Should it protect individuals, or should it transform society?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and obviously, my bias would be that it should protect individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And if you try to transform society in a top down coercive way, it's only going to end
[Amit Varma]: badly.
[Amit Varma]: But leave that whole argument aside.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that like you pointed out that the constitution was partly shaped by
[Amit Varma]: the contingencies of partition.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the historian Gyan Prakash in an episode we did on the emergency spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, so many of the centralizing impulses of the constitution came about because
[Amit Varma]: the country was being torn apart by violence.
[Amit Varma]: So those people sitting in that room in Delhi obviously wanted to centralize more power.
[Amit Varma]: But it then also strikes me, in the narrow context of the relationship between the majority
[Amit Varma]: and the minority, that we took a protective role, but towards the minorities, but a transformative
[Amit Varma]: role towards a majority in the classic example of this.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something where I think I sort of totally understand the RSS point of view.
[Amit Varma]: The example of this is a Hindu code bill, that with the Hindu code bill, you're trying
[Amit Varma]: to transform Hindu society, but you're not doing something equivalent for Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, then, you know, when you have all this talk later on of pseudo secularism
[Amit Varma]: and pandering to minorities and all of that, those seem to be legitimate grievances.
[Amit Varma]: And it is kind of irrelevant whether you should have any code bill at all, whether you should
[Amit Varma]: reform none of them, whether you should reform both of them, it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: But the bottom line is that at that moment, we are not treating them equally.
[Amit Varma]: We are saying that, you know, in one case, the constitution is saying, hey, we'll protect
[Amit Varma]: whatever your customs and whatever they are.
[Amit Varma]: And even there, we're not really protecting individual rights, we're just looking at them
[Amit Varma]: as a group.
[Amit Varma]: But in the other instance, you are saying that, hey, no, we are transformative, and
[Amit Varma]: we want to transform you.
[Amit Varma]: And I can see why, you know, this, this can be just so powerful by itself, as a motivating
[Amit Varma]: factor.
[Amit Varma]: But my broader question is that, how do you then look at, you know, this, this conflict
[Amit Varma]: between should we protect or should we transform because they are in conflict with each other?
[Amit Varma]: Because every transformative act that you try to do involves coercion and involves sort
[Amit Varma]: of not treating citizens equally and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I can understand that when you look at society at that point, and you see so many
[Amit Varma]: things wrong with it, you know, with caste, to begin with, that's obviously number one,
[Amit Varma]: but so many other things, and your instinct is that this is horrendous, we must transform
[Amit Varma]: it, how do we do it?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, now we have the power of the state with us, our colonial masters are gone, let's use
[Amit Varma]: the power of the state.
[Amit Varma]: But I think one of the lessons of history is that top down coercion really doesn't work,
[Amit Varma]: what you need is social transformation coming from within the kind of transformation that
[Amit Varma]: in fact, Gandhi would broadly have sympathized with, where Gandhi's whole thing was that,
[Amit Varma]: no, let's, let's go into the, you know, the villages and the interiors and change society
[Amit Varma]: from within, even if that is too idealistic in a short span of time.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it seems that we rely too much on the transformative nature of the Constitution,
[Amit Varma]: did a halfway and inept job there, and didn't bring about any social change either.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of thoughts?
[Guest]: Okay, no, that's a very powerful question.
[Guest]: I think I agree with much of what you said, but again, I think it just helps to broaden
[Guest]: the frame a little bit, I think, just to, I think, put that narrative in perspective,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And, and I'll first, maybe spend a couple of minutes on the historical narrative, and
[Guest]: then come to the deep philosophical point you raised about is, you know, is this a constitution
[Guest]: protective of, of group rights and plurality in some ways, or is it a constitution of freedom
[Guest]: in some ways?
[Guest]: I mean, so, you know, at one level, I think the narrative you're describing, right, that
[Guest]: that has got entrenched, and I think there's some power to it, that the Indian state was
[Guest]: seen to act asymmetrically towards communities, right.
[Guest]: Now, we can wind the clock back to the 1950s, and think of a different kind of counterfactual.
[Guest]: But I do think it's worth, again, remembering two things, and, and, and I'm stressing this,
[Guest]: because I think it's going to come up again in our contemporary context.
[Guest]: So there is no question that we need, as a society, a consensus that there are certain
[Guest]: basic norms of individual freedom that apply to all communities.
[Guest]: I think if Section 295 has to go in the Indian Penal Code, offenses to religion has to go
[Guest]: for all communities.
[Guest]: I mean, I actually don't think a modern state should have a category called offense to religion.
[Guest]: Doesn't matter what the religion is, you know, in some ways, right.
[Guest]: When it comes to personal laws, for example, which is the most contentious issue, again,
[Guest]: I think the shadow of partition did make a difference, which is, I think, Nehru's concern
[Guest]: that not just that minorities feel safe, but remember, you still haven't solved the question,
[Guest]: which is, who will be exercising power when these personal laws are being reformed, right?
[Guest]: And you know, personal laws do sort of affect the most kind of intimate aspects of a particular
[Guest]: culture's identity in some way.
[Guest]: So there's always much more at stake.
[Guest]: Now, if you had created those relationships of trust, right, let's say even now, I'm all
[Guest]: for a uniform civil code.
[Guest]: I think it's high time we had it.
[Guest]: And even within a uniform civil code, there can be, you know, interesting creative solutions.
[Guest]: But the question is, who do you trust to come up with the content of a code that is actually
[Guest]: just and fair to all communities?
[Guest]: Will the content of that code, right, could it unwittingly have a Hindu majoritarian hue
[Guest]: in it?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Possible, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, going back to the question you asked at the beginning of this program, the
[Guest]: missing element in this debate has been what are the conditions of trust under which reforming
[Guest]: all our personal laws can be a common project?
[Guest]: The misleading part is there is the state and the state reforms Hindus and it doesn't
[Guest]: reform, you know, Muslim personal law.
[Guest]: Even that's strictly speaking not true.
[Guest]: I mean, I think, you know, for political reasons, Rajiv Gandhi overturned the Shah Bano judgment.
[Guest]: In fact, we often forget that the Supreme Court shortly thereafter in Daniel Latifi kind
[Guest]: of reinstated the original Shah Bano judgment without much fuss.
[Guest]: So there are possibilities of reform even there.
[Guest]: The issue is that the state has always been, because it's in a sense seen as a function
[Guest]: of majority power, and the more you make it a function of majority power, right, the less
[Guest]: reason people have to trust that what comes out of it, right, will be actually fair and
[Guest]: just.
[Guest]: So I think, and one of the reasons why we want to lower the temperature of religious
[Guest]: politics in India is because that's a necessary condition for paving the way for having this
[Guest]: debate in a rational, constructive manner that, look, in the 21st century, right, family
[Guest]: relations cannot be constructed on certain legal lines and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So absolutely, I think that's one.
[Guest]: The second thing, I would go even stronger than you, I mean, to me, the Congress Party's
[Guest]: unconscionable sin is that it actually placed Indian Muslims in the worst of both positions.
[Guest]: On the one hand, it empowered the most reactionary elements in that society.
[Guest]: I mean, what is the Indian, All India Muslim Personal Law Board?
[Guest]: I mean, it's an astonishingly obtuse organization, I mean, seriously, you know, but who sustained
[Guest]: its legitimacy?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, you don't have to have an either-or solution, you don't have to say the state
[Guest]: comes marching in, but you can create an intelligent politics where these spaces get opened up.
[Guest]: And people forget, for example, there is an alternative Muslim women's personal law proposal
[Guest]: on the table, right, which is way more progressive, right?
[Guest]: But it was in the Congress Party's interest to keep the Muslims backward and with their
[Guest]: back against the wall.
[Guest]: Because at some point, they did decide, or they thought that you needed them as a kind
[Guest]: of electoral coalition.
[Guest]: And I think there, the BJP's diagnosis is not wrong, right?
[Guest]: That ethnic identities work as electoral fodder, only when there is a kind of collective risk
[Guest]: that they appear.
[Guest]: If they all become individuals, we actually don't have that.
[Guest]: But in the process, you know, when we're talking about the 1950s, I don't know if you've ever
[Guest]: read Paul Brass's biography of Charan Singh.
[Guest]: It's an astonishing book, actually, one of the best kind of a North Indian politics.
[Guest]: But you know, the UP government in the 1950s created an active program of de-Muslimizing
[Guest]: UP government, right?
[Guest]: So if you look at the statistics, right, Muslim under-representation in police, Muslim under-representation
[Guest]: in public institutions of the state, Muslim representation in politics, this was not just
[Guest]: an accident, right?
[Guest]: So you ended up in this bizarre situation where at one level, Muslims were becoming
[Guest]: more marginalized, economically more disempowered, and in a sense, in some states, they've actually
[Guest]: fallen behind Dalits, which is saying quite something, right?
[Guest]: As a result of active choices the state made on education or not giving education, as a
[Guest]: result of the kind of cop-out attitude we have towards Mother Saas, but at the same
[Guest]: time, right, and this is the point Paul Brass makes very powerfully, you had politicians
[Guest]: like Govind Bannapanth, you had politicians like Charan Singh, who were electorally secular,
[Guest]: but administratively and ideologically common, right?
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi, I mean, this is one of the most disastrous episodes in modern Indian history
[Guest]: because here is a government with a 400 seat majority.
[Guest]: Frankly, the modern contemporary debate on free speech starts with the banning of satanic
[Guest]: verses, which kind of then sets the paradigm for competitive victimization, the overturning
[Guest]: of Shahbano, and Congress got it into its head that somehow it could appease both Muslim
[Guest]: nationalism and Hindu nationalism together, right?
[Guest]: The net result was you simply created collective insecurity all around, right?
[Guest]: Now, my plea to the RSS, my plea to the BJP, since they are the hegemonic story, is that
[Guest]: there is a lot of truth in your critique.
[Guest]: Many of us shared it, I mean, you know, this piece wrote 20 years ago, Congress, secularism
[Guest]: and freedom, which actually just made this point.
[Guest]: But in order to overcome this legacy, the first step has to be, in a sense, the recreation
[Guest]: of a kind of civic trust, where these conversations do not stoke fears in all sides, where it
[Guest]: doesn't happen in a context where one group says, look, now we have the power.
[Guest]: And in a sense, we can have them.
[Guest]: Frankly, if liberals in the left are feeling it, think of what Muslims might be feeling
[Guest]: it, right?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So the diagnosis had the truth to it, right?
[Guest]: But it's in a sense, turning the remedy into a kind of poison, right, which is in some
[Guest]: sense is more divisive.
[Guest]: Now, coming to your theoretical question, which is, you know, what is the vision of
[Guest]: the Indian Constitution, I would put it this way, that I actually do think the longer term
[Guest]: vision of the Indian Constitution is the emancipation of individuals from all forms of intermediate
[Guest]: social hierarchies.
[Guest]: I think it recognizes the fact that that can't be done simply through law, right?
[Guest]: Because you have to actually deploy state power, right?
[Guest]: You have to force policemen to make sure that people are allowed to enter temples and not
[Guest]: allowed to temple, right?
[Guest]: And I think their concern for India's diversity in politics, that they hoped that it would
[Guest]: come out through a negotiated process, right?
[Guest]: As you said, you know, there'll be social reform movements.
[Guest]: And that's exactly the thing that we completely stopped.
[Guest]: I mean, Congress Party abdicated it, not just because it had the state power, but I think
[Guest]: even in some senses more broadly.
[Guest]: And the social change that did come about, right, was a social change that came about
[Guest]: for other secular developments as the economy goes more complex, certain identities wither
[Guest]: away, you know, in some instances, you know, so forth.
[Guest]: So I think that was the vision, which was a kind of ameliorative transformation towards
[Guest]: individual rights.
[Guest]: I think the mistake that we have made, and this is again an exercise I set our students
[Guest]: in class sometimes, that there are a couple of clauses, for example, if you think of the
[Guest]: clause of protection of minority institutions, right, which can probably be articulated in
[Guest]: more individualistic rather than collective terms, and you get the same result, right?
[Guest]: In fact, I think in the TMIY case, I mean, I think the debate between Rumapal and Bariyawal
[Guest]: was actually very instructive, where one interpretation was that the minority clauses in the Constitution
[Guest]: are clauses that are setting off exceptions, right?
[Guest]: The other interpretation of that clause is that it's not setting up exceptions, it's
[Guest]: just a signal to minorities that these clauses will also protect you.
[Guest]: So for example, I think on, for example, the freedom to run institutions, a simpler approach
[Guest]: is, and which is, I think, compatible with the text of the Constitution, should be simply
[Guest]: to say that, look, so long as you're not taking state money, and you're not doing any other
[Guest]: kind of fiduciary harm to any other constitutional provision, any group should have the freedom
[Guest]: to run its institutions as they want, and if you have that provision, minorities will
[Guest]: automatically be protected, right?
[Guest]: I mean, but I think the way in which we've developed that Constitution law, we unnecessarily
[Guest]: give this kind of indication that these exceptions are being carved out, right?
[Guest]: But you can achieve those same goals better with, in a sense, freedom.
[Guest]: I would also say this about our discourse on diversity, for example, and one of my kind
[Guest]: of worries about a lot of my friends, actually, you know, our circles, as it were.
[Guest]: So we like to celebrate India's diversity as an astonishing country in some ways.
[Guest]: But diversity is also a conceptual trap, because, you know, diversity is quite compatible with
[Guest]: each person being boxed into a particular identity.
[Guest]: We need to defend freedom.
[Guest]: If individuals are given freedom, lots of new forms of diversity will emerge, right?
[Guest]: The identity categories that we think are salient right now will cease to be salient
[Guest]: five, 10 years from now.
[Guest]: And that's all for the good.
[Guest]: I mean, that's right.
[Guest]: So I think that self-conception that in order to oppose the mono-ethnicity of Hindutva,
[Guest]: what you need to propose in its place is diversity, I think can be conceptually misleading, because
[Guest]: diversity is also compatible with a certain kind of fixity.
[Guest]: I think where you and I will probably agree is that we just need to go back to a, you
[Guest]: know, basic jurisprudence of individual rights and dignity, protect those freedoms, and all
[Amit Varma]: the diversity will come in its wake.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the seen and the unseen is one where you actually come out as a closet
[Amit Varma]: libertarian quite clearly, you know, one of the sort of constant bugbears that I have,
[Amit Varma]: and it's not just with regards to the Constitution, but politics today, even more so today, is
[Amit Varma]: that we think too much in terms of groups and not individuals, you know, like that old
[Amit Varma]: saying goes, an individual is the smallest minority.
[Amit Varma]: And the moment you sort of put a label on an individual that you are X or you are Y,
[Amit Varma]: it constrains individual freedom, even in the ways that you think of yourself, like
[Amit Varma]: these structures matter so much, which I'll kind of come back to.
[Amit Varma]: But before I ask my other big conceptual question about the founding moment, I want to also
[Amit Varma]: go back to the counterfactual, because you know, the more that I read the history of
[Amit Varma]: that period, and even before, it seems to me that all the tall leaders of the Congress
[Amit Varma]: were Hindu nationalists of a sort, from, you know, Patel to Prasad and Pant Shastri and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's this, you know, the interesting incident in Uttar Pradesh, when, you know,
[Amit Varma]: activists of the VHP installed the idol of Lord Ram within the Babri Masjid and at that
[Amit Varma]: point, Pant was Chief Minister and the Home Minister of UP was Lal Bahadur Shastri.
[Amit Varma]: And Nehru was aghast and he sent orders that immediately removed the idol and blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah.
[Amit Varma]: And they prevaricated and then inertia took over and it never happened because it didn't
[Amit Varma]: want it to happen.
[Amit Varma]: But what has also struck me reading the history of that period is that Nehru in that sense
[Amit Varma]: was a man apart in both good ways and bad ways, not just one or the other when it's
[Amit Varma]: so easy to think of him in binary terms.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the counterfactual that fascinates me is what if Nehru didn't exist, you know,
[Amit Varma]: or what if for whatever reason, like, you know, there was a point in 1950 where he got
[Amit Varma]: frustrated and he said, I won't quit and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And what if for some reason, he wasn't the person sort of shaping all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you've thought about or how do you think we would have taken shape
[Amit Varma]: differently?
[Guest]: And, you know, what are the possibilities?
[Guest]: No, we actually have, you know, one of my colleagues and friends, Rudraksha Mukherjee,
[Guest]: the historian actually poses, there's also an interesting counterfactual, if Nehru and
[Guest]: Bose together had split with Gandhi, which they had come very close to.
[Guest]: And on ideological grounds, they were all on the same side.
[Guest]: I think it was Nehru's filial piety towards Gandhi that kind of kept him in place.
[Guest]: You know, I think what would have happened to the Congress Party, right, in some senses
[Guest]: would have.
[Guest]: But I think in particular in these times, though, I think it's worth remembering one
[Guest]: very big thing about that generation, right, is yes, they disagreed.
[Guest]: Many of them were Hindu nationalists.
[Guest]: But it is remarkable that they all recognized greatness when they saw it.
[Guest]: And it is remarkable that they continue to agree to work despite their differences.
[Guest]: I mean, I think the Patel-Nehru relationship, contrary to what the BJP says is, you know,
[Guest]: my colleague Srinath will point out, it's very complicated.
[Guest]: I mean, Patel has the greatness to recognize Nehru's indispensability, right, you know,
[Guest]: in some senses at one level.
[Guest]: And Nehru, in turn, at different points, has the openness to say, yes, you know, I can
[Guest]: talk to Shyama Prasad Mukherjee.
[Guest]: Yes, Ambedkar needs to be part of the draft.
[Guest]: K.M.
[Guest]: Munshi, one of the most fascinating figures in the kind of Constituent Assembly, right.
[Guest]: So you know, there's that old saying, right, that often what builds nations is not the
[Guest]: consistency of their ideologies.
[Guest]: It's in a sense, the sensibilities and temperaments of the people who come together to build it.
[Guest]: And I think there was something about that generation that actually trumped a lot of
[Guest]: this stuff.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, they didn't all walk out in a half.
[Guest]: They did see the Constituent Assembly as a joint project.
[Guest]: Yes, it was not representative in terms of mass franchise, but Congress did bend over
[Guest]: backwards to make sure that you had Ambedkar's and the K.M. Munshi's in very critical drafting
[Guest]: roles in the Constitution, right.
[Guest]: So I think that sensibility, not to take away anything from Nehru, but it is one thing I
[Guest]: would give all those others credit for as well, that despite themselves, right, including
[Guest]: Rajendra Prasad, despite themselves, they actually did see not just Nehru, but I think
[Guest]: it was a kind of tacit acknowledgement that Nehru stands for more than Nehru the person.
[Guest]: And there is a implicit constitutional vision here that can be shades of disagreement over,
[Guest]: you know, right.
[Guest]: And I think what reconciles, I think, this fact, the kind of how can you be Hindu nationalist
[Guest]: in Congress is, as I said, I think because it's so much outwardly directed, I mean, I
[Guest]: think one of the interesting things about 20th century Hindu nationalism is that internally
[Guest]: it has also always tried to place itself as progressive, right.
[Guest]: I mean, it has to be at the kind of cutting edge of global, and, you know, take Savarkar,
[Guest]: for example.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, in the relationship between Hindus and others, Savarkar has an edge.
[Guest]: But he is internally a reformer in some senses.
[Guest]: And I think there are a few, I think, Govind Ballapad, for example, who are, I think, genuine
[Guest]: conservatives, which is what they want to preserve that sort of older Brahminical hierarchical
[Guest]: order.
[Guest]: So the success of that generation of Hindu nationalism was that they did create a certain
[Guest]: kind of at least internal peace with modernity, that, look, this is the trajectory inevitably
[Guest]: we'll have to go down, right?
[Guest]: As I said, I think the problem was that it was quite compatible with a certain kind of
[Guest]: prejudice and hostility to Muslims.
[Guest]: And by the way, you don't have to be Hindu nationalist to have that hostility and prejudices,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: Many liberals can have that, right?
[Guest]: And not being able to disentangle the ideological and constitutional aspects from where does
[Guest]: the shading to just becoming a prejudiced against the other, I just don't like you for
[Guest]: who you are.
[Guest]: It's nothing, you know, it's nothing that you do.
[Guest]: You're just very being poses a threat for me, right?
[Guest]: I think that's just an autonomous dynamic.
[Guest]: But yes, I mean, you're right that I think Nehru became that kind of indispensable figure
[Guest]: where even these Hindu nationalists sort of recognize that for the kind of progressivism
[Guest]: they had in mind internally, it needed to be embodied in a figure who was, you know,
[Guest]: more constitutional in some ways than they were.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I did, you know, when I framed the question, I didn't mean the term Hindu nationalist
[Amit Varma]: in a pejorative sense, but in these modern times, it comes across like that.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question, and this might be a little long winded, I'll begin by quoting something
[Amit Varma]: that you have written in your excellent book, The Burden of Democracy, where you wrote,
[Amit Varma]: quote, if the faith reposed in democracy was unique to India, the style in which government
[Amit Varma]: was imagined was anything but.
[Amit Varma]: The entire colonial state apparatus with its laws, conventions, ubiquitous rules, faith
[Amit Varma]: and the impartiality of the few good men that comprise the state was taken over almost intact.
[Amit Varma]: To be sure, the state was now to be used for nationalist ends to secure India's territorial
[Amit Varma]: integrity to spread and implement the development mission of the new regime.
[Amit Varma]: But the relationship between the state apparatus to whatever ends it was going to be displayed
[Amit Varma]: and democracy was going to forever remain contentious, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And again, when one looks at the Constituent Assembly debates, you have Somnath Lahiri
[Amit Varma]: pointing exactly this out, where he talks about, you know, the fundamental rights, the
[Amit Varma]: way they've been framed with the caveats immediately following where Lahiri says, quote, I feel
[Amit Varma]: that many of these fundamental rights have been framed from the point of view of a police
[Amit Varma]: constable.
[Amit Varma]: I find that many minimal rights are conceded and are almost invariably followed by a provision
[Amit Varma]: which takes away a right almost completely, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And my sort of question here is that, does the design of the state then shape the culture
[Amit Varma]: and shape society itself?
[Amit Varma]: For example, in the same book, you later talk about how the structural inequalities within
[Amit Varma]: society can shape the self and I'll quote that bit as well, quote, that inequality and
[Amit Varma]: our relations to the state are not simply structural injustices, they also profoundly
[Amit Varma]: shape our sense of self and social possibilities.
[Amit Varma]: It is a peculiar sense of the self in relation to others that social inequality and the state
[Amit Varma]: have produced that gives Indian politics its texture, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of, you know, it is my thinking that the design of the state that the founders
[Amit Varma]: chose, a lot of it through inertia, where you just take over the colonial apparatus
[Amit Varma]: and took over, you know, so much of the IPC and didn't safeguard fundamental rights strongly
[Amit Varma]: enough in the constitution.
[Amit Varma]: What that did was that it centralized power, it made the state very powerful.
[Amit Varma]: And I think from the point of view of a citizen, I think of the matrix of possibilities for
[Amit Varma]: how an individual can get ahead and what happens in those sort of what the design of the state
[Amit Varma]: then almost incentivizes is that you get ahead by manipulating the state by getting yourself
[Amit Varma]: in rent seeking positions by using the coercive power of the state to your ends, and not so
[Amit Varma]: much through voluntary action within society, which is a positive some game, you know, Jagdish
[Amit Varma]: Bhagwati once pointed out, I think, around 2000 that, you know, China has a profit seeking
[Amit Varma]: mindset and India has a rent seeking mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And mind, you know, one of the conjectures, one of my conjectures for why that might be
[Amit Varma]: so is the design of our institutions, where the easiest way, at least for many decades
[Amit Varma]: to make a fast buck to get ahead in India was to become part of the state apparatus
[Amit Varma]: and use some of the coercive power of the state, which is a zero sum game, rather than
[Amit Varma]: rely on voluntary action within society, which is basically what actual free markets instead
[Amit Varma]: of the markets we've had for most of this time, would enable.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you think about this, like, is the design of the state, something that has
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally changed society and shaped culture itself, just by the way it was conceived or
[Amit Varma]: not conceived in the sense that we just took over the colonial apparatus?
[Guest]: Oh, this is a large and profound question.
[Guest]: And I think I'll divide the answer into three different aspects of the state because I think
[Guest]: logic operates differently.
[Guest]: But I do have to say, I think, you know, while I understand the spirit of Jagdish's quote,
[Guest]: I think it's hard to argue that China is also not rent-seeking.
[Guest]: I mean, in fact, maybe they're smarter about how they do it, but the scale is actually
[Guest]: of a different, staggeringly different order.
[Guest]: So I think I'll divide your question into three different bits, three different parts
[Guest]: of the state.
[Guest]: One which I think you began alluding to, which is in the realm of civil liberties, right?
[Guest]: We retained large parts of the criminal code, IPC, section 295, we retained sedition law,
[Guest]: I think, most scandalously, the Supreme Court's great leeway to the state over Armed Forces
[Guest]: Special Powers Act, the early judgments in Gopalan.
[Guest]: Now there, I actually do think that even though it was only episodically used, the culture
[Guest]: and opening that we created for easy violations of civil rights, I think then set a template
[Guest]: that which is used later on.
[Guest]: And you could argue, look, again, don't make this judgment in hindsight, you've just come
[Guest]: out of partition.
[Guest]: We can't even actually in a sense imagine, I mean, and Nehru says this, I mean, the last
[Guest]: parts of discovery of India, there's this extraordinary, none of us have any idea what
[Guest]: India is going to look like, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we just suffered this extraordinary trauma, which they weren't in a position of
[Guest]: understanding.
[Guest]: But I don't think that that excuses the full extent.
[Guest]: I do slightly disagree with you a little bit on this whole question of sort of the limitations
[Guest]: to rights in the Indian constitutions, particularly in freedom of expression and so forth.
[Guest]: Because there are two ways of looking at that limitation, right?
[Guest]: One is that, you know, you could actually say that, look, and I think that was the intent
[Guest]: behind those limitations is, inevitably, these things will end up coming to court, right?
[Guest]: And somebody will say something, you know, outrageous.
[Guest]: And I think, as Madhav Khosla's book has pointed out, that one of the reasons you probably
[Guest]: have a little bit of excess codification in the Indian constitution is because the framers
[Guest]: wanted to make sure that there were only particular kinds of limitations and questions that generally
[Guest]: a judge is actually asked.
[Guest]: It's not just sort of random, you know, there's the reverse danger, right?
[Guest]: And by the way, I mean, if you take free speech, for example, I mean, just to again, put it
[Guest]: in perspective, you know, the American constitution's record, even to the late 50s, was as appalling
[Guest]: as the Indian states was.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, pacifists were still being arrested in 1920s, 1930s.
[Guest]: So it's, I think, a tricky thing.
[Guest]: But I actually agree with you.
[Guest]: I mean, I think on a couple of things like sedition and so forth, there's just no excuse
[Guest]: for what we put in the text of the constitution.
[Guest]: And I think then creating a culture, I think, in the judiciary that, frankly, does not ask
[Guest]: any questions of the state, when it comes to the exercise of executive power or civil
[Guest]: liberties.
[Guest]: It didn't ask it in the 50s, in the emergency, and certainly not asking it now.
[Guest]: I think there's a second dimension to the state, which is where you are coming from,
[Guest]: where I have most sympathy with your argument, I think Jagdish's position, you know, no matter
[Guest]: what anybody says, most of us are supporters of the 1991 economic reforms, where it was
[Guest]: certainly the case that the state created this absolute intricate and self-reinforcing
[Guest]: web of patronage and corruption, which corroded political and social life and stymied economic
[Guest]: efficiency in ways that we cannot even imagine.
[Guest]: No two ways about it.
[Guest]: Now, again, I think a little bit of historical perspective, which is that some of it, I think,
[Guest]: was inevitable.
[Guest]: I mean, look, we forget in 1947, right, when we had a foreign exchange crisis, there is
[Guest]: virtually no domestic capital to speak of.
[Guest]: I mean, capital as we understand it doesn't in a sense exist, right, in some senses, right?
[Guest]: There's no market in some senses that we speak of, right?
[Guest]: And there are no capabilities, because the one thing the British colonialism was not
[Guest]: was a development colonialism.
[Guest]: I mean, I think my old teacher, Mr. Atul Kohli, has argued this very powerfully.
[Guest]: I mean, the British state was interested in keeping order, extracting enough, using tariffs
[Guest]: and other things to give Britain a trade advantage, and that was about it, right?
[Guest]: There was no serious developmental investment.
[Guest]: So to that extent, it was inevitable that the state would have to be the locus of some
[Guest]: kind of collective action, because development requires us doing things, not just letting
[Guest]: people free to do things.
[Guest]: I mean, it's okay to say that, you know, you have the freedom to invest, but if there is
[Guest]: zero capital, right, where do you go?
[Guest]: But even there, I would support you, which is that I do think at least even as early
[Guest]: as the late 50s, I think direction should have been clearer, that particularly in domestic
[Guest]: industrial production, the license permit charges, we call it, needed to be in a sense
[Guest]: dismantled.
[Guest]: It also had the consequence of becoming enmeshed in our electoral economy.
[Guest]: So you know, that was, those were the rents that then sustained political coalition and
[Guest]: so forth.
[Guest]: So I think on that, I'm in agreement with you, and I think my big worry is that we are
[Guest]: actually going to go back to the bad old days of the 70s.
[Guest]: I think there's going to be too much sort of, in some senses, discretion in the allocation
[Guest]: of capital of the kind that we witnessed in the 70s.
[Guest]: But the third area, and to me, this is the biggest, frankly, failure of the industry,
[Guest]: because other ones were correctable in some ways, was in order for markets to function,
[Guest]: right, there need to be certain baseline necessary conditions in place, right?
[Guest]: If India is to be competitive, you need logistics, you need energy, you need education, right?
[Guest]: Even Hayek thought you need public health, right?
[Guest]: And the irony of the Indian state in the 1950s and 60s was that the place where it needed
[Guest]: to have a more effective catalyzing role was the place where it unconscionably failed the
[Guest]: most, right?
[Guest]: And actually then creating decades of distrust about the state.
[Guest]: So you got the worst of both worlds, right?
[Guest]: You didn't get deficiencies of an entrepreneurial culture, but you did not get, I mean, and
[Guest]: this is one difference between India and communist China, the one difference between India and,
[Guest]: you know, the Soviet Union and other communist countries, you actually did not for years
[Guest]: and years, a few IITs apart and so forth, get the human capital infrastructure energy
[Guest]: base.
[Guest]: I mean, one thing we forget about the Chinese state, that's what it does, right?
[Guest]: It's not just a free market, it did manage to educate its population faster than we did.
[Guest]: It did manage to create the collective goods that are required for competitiveness, particularly
[Guest]: infrastructure.
[Guest]: I mean, even now with Atmir Barbarat, the thing that worries me is nobody asks you what
[Guest]: makes an economy competitive, right?
[Guest]: Costs, energy costs, logistic costs, right?
[Guest]: Human capital costs.
[Guest]: These are the basic places where I think the state needed to have a role.
[Guest]: And these are the places in which the way which the state ended up being designed was
[Guest]: a catastrophe.
[Guest]: I think education being the prime example where it wasn't so much that, I mean, I lay
[Guest]: my cards on the table in this, which is, I actually do think you need good and effective
[Guest]: forms of public education.
[Guest]: There are very few examples in the world of societies sort of not being able to, or being
[Guest]: able to educate their population without public education.
[Guest]: But the form in which you design the education system where, for example, teachers' unions
[Guest]: got enmeshed in the political process, I mean, it was a disaster waiting to happen.
[Guest]: And in some senses, a lot of the privatization that happens in India does not happen because
[Guest]: of the first principles that you are talking about.
[Guest]: It's simply, okay, because there's state failure, let's go to the market, except that the conditions
[Guest]: for making the market succeed, right?
[Guest]: As Adam Smith said, light but effective regulation still don't exist in many areas, right?
[Guest]: The last and final thing I'd say about this, and I think for those of us who are particularly
[Guest]: worried about economic reform, as I'm sure you are, right, you know, the challenge which
[Guest]: we haven't solved is the relationship of Indian capital to Indian politics, right?
[Guest]: So one, I'll be very honest with you, I think the Indian capital itself has been a relatively
[Guest]: unenlightened group.
[Guest]: I mean, even now, when their back is against the wall, I mean, you know, 3% growth, as
[Guest]: Marx would have said, they're just not thinking as a class for itself, sometimes, which they
[Guest]: would actually, I mean, at least on their own terms, right?
[Guest]: But I have something more in mind in the relationship between capital and politics, which is, because
[Guest]: politics depended on certain forms of resource generation, the close connections between
[Guest]: capital and politics ended up undermining both, right?
[Guest]: A lot of reforms didn't happen because incumbent capital didn't want it.
[Guest]: I mean, that was Indira Gandhi's model in some ways, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it wasn't that she was anti-capital.
[Guest]: It's just that like, the builders are, you know, periodically throwing out money.
[Guest]: I was once reading the KGB archives, published archives, just kind of randomly, and the extraordinary
[Guest]: fascinating thing in the 70s, right, where, you know, Pranab Mukherjee, Raghuram Iyer,
[Guest]: stalwarts of the Congress are kind of mediating with the Russians on the rupee ruble trade
[Guest]: for the supply of tobacco, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, and you can guess what the main objective of that mediation was.
[Guest]: So in some senses, the Indian state has always thought it necessary to control capital enough.
[Guest]: What happened in 1991 was we unleashed liberalization in some sectors, because we said there are
[Guest]: rents to be collected elsewhere, factor markets in particular, and now what you could do in
[Guest]: factor markets was just mind-boggling, right?
[Guest]: And that's the crisis that came to haunt us in UPA2, right, where just at the moment where
[Guest]: Indian capital was being legitimized, finally, right, you suddenly have this public perception
[Guest]: that Indian capital is broken all the way down, because factor markets are broken.
[Guest]: Credit, right, I mean, this is one thing which very few in India have paid attention to,
[Guest]: and I think Jagdish Bhagwati there was right, I think Arvind Subramaniam's original arguments
[Guest]: were right, which is we just didn't pay enough attention to finance, and the way in which
[Guest]: the structures of financialization, right, create this deeply unhealthy relationship
[Guest]: between state and capital, to the point where the capital itself can't be a counterweight
[Guest]: to the state, because it's so dependent on it.
[Guest]: And frankly, we are entering an even more exalted phase of that again.
[Guest]: I mean, I think what you're going to get in the next 5-10 years is you're going to get
[Guest]: greater and greater concentrations of capital, in part produced by unfair regulatory arbitrage
[Guest]: by the state, right, and because capital allocation is actually what matters to markets, it's
[Guest]: going to distort the opportunities of lots of small, medium, genuine entrepreneurs, right.
[Guest]: So we just haven't got that state-capital relationship right.
[Guest]: And I think, to be honest, I think the problem is at both ends, because it's also that incumbent
[Guest]: holders of capital will continue to subsidize, not just because it's in their individual
[Guest]: interest that I can understand, but I think even in the way in which they articulate what
[Guest]: their demands are, right.
[Guest]: And it's going to therefore both going to distort our politics and the structure of
[Guest]: Indian capitalism.
[Amit Varma]: So I have four observations to make on these very insightful thoughts of yours.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, first, I'll just inform my listeners that I had a great episode with
[Amit Varma]: Madhav Khosla on his book, India's founding moment, and we discussed this there.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll continue to be a little skeptical about the rationale of those caveats about
[Amit Varma]: limitations or limitations, I'm not quite sure of that.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, observation one, I'm kind of struck by the paradox that we have
[Amit Varma]: both lost faith in the state.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, you know, there's almost a religion around the state in the sense that one, we
[Amit Varma]: don't expect the state to do anything for us, we kind of exist in spite of the state
[Amit Varma]: because there is no rule of law anywhere, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And that might be one reason, for example, that the performance of the current government
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter at all, the approval ratings are super high, because people just have completely
[Amit Varma]: disassociated what is happening in their lives and the governance they're getting with whoever
[Amit Varma]: is in charge.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, that's paradoxical, because whenever anything goes wrong, and
[Amit Varma]: an Indian wants something to change, their instinctive response is that the state should
[Amit Varma]: do this, that the state should pass a law or the state should fund this or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a paradox, I kind of struggled to get my head around, there's a disconnect
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Amit Varma]: My second observation is that, you know, what you said about education, in fact, I just
[Amit Varma]: had a great episode on this with Karthik Muralidharan, which was 20 minutes long.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things I'd like to say is that I don't think there is a binary
[Amit Varma]: between public education and private provision.
[Amit Varma]: What I have always been in favor of is that by all means, we have public education, but
[Amit Varma]: also allow private education, you know, allow private entrepreneurs to set up schools for
[Amit Varma]: profit, don't set conditions, and all of that, just make it easy for them, which doesn't
[Amit Varma]: mean you do away with public education.
[Amit Varma]: And my contention is that just as we saw in 91, that you freed up telecom, you freed up
[Amit Varma]: airlines, and we can see the difference that competition made in those areas where you
[Amit Varma]: can buy a mobile phone today for 600 rupees and access is so democratized and easily available
[Amit Varma]: and nobody misses MTNL.
[Amit Varma]: I suspect same would happen to education.
[Amit Varma]: But even if it doesn't keep the public education going, you don't need to constrain private
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurs.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this was a one fundamental flaw in the design of the state that even back
[Amit Varma]: in the day, fine, there is no capital, you need to build industries.
[Amit Varma]: But you don't stop others from doing all this stuff, you leave that space for them.
[Amit Varma]: My third observation was what you said about capital and politics, where first, I'd like
[Amit Varma]: to draw the distinction that what is good for capitalists is often not good for the
[Amit Varma]: people that, you know, Milton Friedman drew a distinction between pro-business and pro-markets.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember Ram Guha once making the argument in his book India after Gandhi, where he spoke
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, the Bombay Plan, and how, sort of, you know, in the 40s, so many businessmen
[Amit Varma]: were for Nehru's state led model.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, of course, they would be they wanted protectionism, they wanted to
[Amit Varma]: protect their sort of area, which is why, you know, what is good for big businesses,
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily good for markets.
[Amit Varma]: But the other point there about money and power, that is something that I feel fairly
[Amit Varma]: strongly about is that yes, of course, there is a vicious circle between money and power,
[Amit Varma]: money will always chase power and use it to generate more money.
[Amit Varma]: That's the nature of the game.
[Amit Varma]: I think there is only one way to break that, which is not by demonizing big money, but
[Amit Varma]: which is instead by reducing the power of the state, to the extent that it no longer
[Amit Varma]: makes sense for big money to chase that power.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, a big industrialist will say, how can I make money, I have to make it by creating
[Amit Varma]: better products and by competing better, because I cannot use the coercive power of the state
[Amit Varma]: to stop my competitors or do anti-competitive things.
[Amit Varma]: That was observation number three.
[Guest]: I'm sorry if this is a bit off.
[Amit Varma]: And my fourth one is really a sort of a question that comes from this question of the design
[Amit Varma]: of the state, which is that when the BJP took over in 2014, from the Congress, at one level,
[Amit Varma]: it seems like a very fundamental shift.
[Amit Varma]: I phrased it perhaps almost too grandiosely by saying that politics has finally caught
[Amit Varma]: up with culture or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: You have referred to it as something that could, you know, reverse India's progress
[Amit Varma]: to a point where the damage may be irreversible.
[Amit Varma]: But my larger sort of observation here is that just as independent India led to a takeover
[Amit Varma]: of a colonial apparatus by rulers with a different, you know, color of skin, similarly, it might
[Amit Varma]: be the case that in 2014, what simply happened was that the BJP took over an identical state
[Amit Varma]: apparatus.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the laws under which all of these people, vada vada rao and all these guys have
[Amit Varma]: been arrested are laws framed by the UPA, which many of them were arrested under in
[Amit Varma]: the past.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is really same old, same old, it's a different bunch of people with
[Amit Varma]: slightly different imperatives.
[Amit Varma]: But the fundamental flaw, which was a flaw in the conception and design of the state
[Amit Varma]: still remains.
[Guest]: So I think to observe, I mean, I broadly agree with you, but I think the readers will have
[Guest]: more fun if we disagree a little bit, at least the nuances, I think two things, right?
[Guest]: So one, I think on your last point, which I think is fair enough, I mean, I do think
[Guest]: one of the things we need to reflect about the fact is that the BJP did not need to create
[Guest]: any new law to, in a sense, impose its authority in our communal designs, right?
[Guest]: But I think there is a second part of the culture story that we often don't reflect
[Guest]: on enough, which is every constitution needs to be made to work.
[Guest]: I mean, if only design produced, and in fact, the more I studied public history, I used
[Guest]: to actually believe a lot in institutional design and still do, obviously, design matters,
[Guest]: internal incentives matter, structures of accountability matter.
[Guest]: But one of the sobering lessons of history is you can have all those design features.
[Guest]: But if the aims of that new constitution are not internalized by its principal functionaries,
[Guest]: it's not going to work.
[Guest]: I think the Indian Supreme Court is a perfect example.
[Guest]: I mean, it's one thing to say, look, there is a law, sedition law still on the books.
[Guest]: It's another thing to say when the Supreme Court says, we are not going to give you a
[Guest]: habeas corpus hearing for a year.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no conceivable constraint there.
[Guest]: I mean, now you can theorize post-retirement appointments, although I don't think, frankly,
[Guest]: that's the issue here.
[Guest]: So I actually do think that we are in this interesting moment, and one of the reasons
[Guest]: I worry about a lot of the institutional design stuff is that sometimes it actually displaces
[Guest]: individual responsibility as well.
[Guest]: It becomes a convenient excuse.
[Guest]: I mean, even the Supreme Court throws its hands up and says, this is how the constitution
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: Of course, it's not like that.
[Guest]: You can do a habeas corpus hearing tomorrow and, in a sense, render a judgment.
[Guest]: And you know, constitutions are often, in a sense, destroyed by their elites, to be
[Guest]: honest.
[Guest]: I mean, the masses have certain grievances.
[Guest]: And I think what we are witnessing, in a sense, is, for a variety of reasons, that elite destruction
[Guest]: where even the most independent of institutions on paper are caving in ways that actually
[Guest]: don't make sense.
[Guest]: Even the United States, for example, is having the similar challenge where constitutional
[Guest]: law scholars will say, you know, we can't go into class now and tell our kids what is
[Guest]: the American constitution, right?
[Guest]: So I do think we need to think about that aspect, right, going back to the human nature
[Guest]: point of it, right, which is that think about the role of officials and all of this.
[Guest]: The second thing I think I wanted to say, I agree with your point about kind of schooling
[Guest]: and stuff.
[Guest]: It's, you know, it can be done in a way in which it is neither, either or.
[Guest]: But on this rent-seeking bit, and I think you're exactly right, which is that on first
[Guest]: principles, if you keep the state out of business, business can be kept out of state.
[Guest]: But here's the second sobering lesson, right, which is that if your image of where you can
[Guest]: keep the state out is license per mitrage, kind of restrictions on production and, you
[Guest]: know, restrictions on pricing, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: But any modern business is enmeshed in a different set of regulatory imperatives.
[Guest]: So think of environmental regulation, for example, right now, you could, in principle,
[Guest]: come up with a quotient solution, come up with a tort law penalty solution.
[Guest]: But again, there is no regulatory place in the world, right, where the state will not
[Guest]: have to take some decision, land as a scarce resource in some ways, right?
[Guest]: Zoning is a state decision.
[Guest]: I mean, we forget how much of the US political economy is simply a function of zoning, right?
[Guest]: Okay, you have to do some coordination function in zoning, right?
[Guest]: Now, what has unfortunately happened is that the weight of that corruption has shifted
[Guest]: to all of these areas, or there's greater weight in these areas, these are always corrupt
[Guest]: in some ways, right?
[Guest]: Environmental regulation, factor markets, all of that.
[Guest]: So even if all that you're saying is correct, I think in large areas of where you can think
[Guest]: of deregulation, there is still enough important areas left, which are fundamental to businesses
[Guest]: being able to operate, but also social good needed to be protected in some ways, that
[Guest]: I don't think simply liberalization is going to be the whole answer.
[Guest]: Because you, and that's exactly what we saw post 91, that, you know, I don't have to pay
[Guest]: money now to get a phone, I don't have to pay money to get another industrial license.
[Guest]: But I do have to pay money if I want to produce my water, or things of that kind, right?
[Guest]: So we need to think smartly about where do we need to, right, produce regulation.
[Guest]: And simply the narrative that if we simply got the state out of it, is actually not going
[Guest]: to, you know, tell the whole story.
[Amit Varma]: No, I actually agree with you. And this is probably where I come out of the closet as
[Amit Varma]: a non libertarian, my purist friends would say, well, I'm not saying that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there should be no state regulation in areas like the environment, for example, because
[Amit Varma]: it's very obvious that that's a place where you do need the state and even Gaussian solutions
[Amit Varma]: won't always work.
[Amit Varma]: But those are sort of kind of exceptional cases.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And then when we come back, let's get down to talking about Indian politics itself and
[Amit Varma]: how it has evolved in all this time.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Vivek Kaur.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Here to tell you about a new weekly podcast that Vivek and I have launched called Econ
[Unknown]: Central.
[Unknown]: In Econ Central, we will help you make sense of the economic news of the last week.
[Unknown]: And we'll also try to explain complex subjects in a simple language.
[Amit Varma]: We will also take events outside the world of economics, like from politics, sports,
[Amit Varma]: literature, and explain them through the lens of economic thinking.
[Unknown]: Why is the stock market going up when the economy is going down?
[Unknown]: What's the deal with high petrol prices?
[Amit Varma]: Should we boycott Chinese goods?
[Amit Varma]: What does free speech have to do with incentives?
[Amit Varma]: Why are the roving bandits of Uttar Pradesh in competition with the biggest protection
[Amit Varma]: racket out there, the Indian state?
[Unknown]: All this and more in our new weekly podcast, Econ Central.
[Amit Varma]: Econ Central launched a few weeks ago and is free on all podcast apps.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse our archives at econcentral.in.
[Unknown]: Econ Central, you have an incentive to listen.
[Amit Varma]: Don't forget the URL, econcentral.in.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm still talking with Pratap Bhanu Mehta about, you know, the state of our democracy
[Amit Varma]: 73 years after we became independent.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I want to talk about politics right now.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to, you know, I'll quote again from your book, The Burden of Democracy, where
[Amit Varma]: at one point you said, quote, the imperatives of seeking sustainable majorities, most observers
[Amit Varma]: argue, moderate even the most radical of movements, giving Indian politics a largely centrist
[Amit Varma]: caste, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is both, I would find profoundly true, and also is being profoundly challenged
[Amit Varma]: in these modern times.
[Amit Varma]: And I want your response to, you know, both of those.
[Amit Varma]: One, I think it's, it's obviously profoundly true, because, you know, as we were discussing
[Amit Varma]: before the show, the lens of left and right don't necessarily matter to, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: India, because all parties when it comes to, you know, are sort of left of center when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to economics, which is to say that their status and they believe in the heavy
[Amit Varma]: hand of the state, and equally are right of center when it comes to society, as we can
[Amit Varma]: see in these modern times, with even the Congress and the Aam Aadmi Party pandering to the same
[Amit Varma]: sort of voter base, which the BJP seems to have lapped up.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, yeah, they are kind of similar, perhaps, because, you know, being skilled
[Amit Varma]: politicians, they have an acute sense of what the culture is like, and maybe as that changes
[Amit Varma]: over time, supply will adjust automatically to demand.
[Amit Varma]: But the other aspect where it is being challenged is that what I find in modern politics, and
[Amit Varma]: this is possibly something catalyzed by technology, is that there is a tendency to make people
[Amit Varma]: more and more extreme.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of things here.
[Amit Varma]: I think what technology has done is that it creates what Cass Sunstein calls group polarization,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, one, there might be preferences that you do not state in public because they're
[Amit Varma]: not considered polite or acceptable, which could involve bigotry or sexism or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But when through social media, you see that enough people share that, you get emboldened
[Amit Varma]: and you form what is called a preference cascade, which is why a lot of parties and politicians
[Amit Varma]: don't need to dog whistle anymore.
[Amit Varma]: They can just straight up say the most outrageous thing.
[Amit Varma]: But the other thing what happens is that our tribalism expresses itself and are forming
[Amit Varma]: these echo chambers and these sort of tribes online.
[Amit Varma]: And that drifts towards the extremes automatically, because how do you lift your stature within
[Amit Varma]: your in-group?
[Amit Varma]: You do it by signaling how much of a true believer you are, which could be by, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of virtue signaling, abusing the other side, not arguing with usually abusing if
[Amit Varma]: it's social media, or even attacking adherents of, you know, even attacking people in your
[Amit Varma]: own tribe who to you are not pure enough, you know, and or fail some essential purity
[Amit Varma]: test and therefore you raise your own status within your in-group.
[Amit Varma]: And what this seems to do is it seems to have an influence within not just on social media,
[Amit Varma]: but an influence on politics where everyone is driven to the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: So in America, you have a Trump on one extreme and you have the rise of woke politics at
[Amit Varma]: the other extreme, which is also looking at, you know, neo Marxist narratives of oppression
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, looking at group identities rather than individuals, you have an extremism
[Amit Varma]: happening there.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, what, you know, in India, they're all cut from the same mold.
[Amit Varma]: But what we have seen within the BJP or the Jansangh as it was before is that an observation
[Amit Varma]: commonly made is that each leader seems, you know, makes a previous guy look moderate.
[Amit Varma]: So Vajpayee made Shyama Prasad look moderate, Advani, you know, made Vajpayee look moderate
[Amit Varma]: and so on to Modi and Adityanath and God knows who next.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost seems inevitable that then within a party, within a tribe of true believers,
[Amit Varma]: the only way to raise your stature is not by seeming moderate, because then you can
[Amit Varma]: be accused of being a sellout or whatever, but by being more extreme than the last guy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, everybody is driven to these extreme fringes.
[Amit Varma]: And this is quite the opposite of what you call, you know, the centrism, which you said
[Amit Varma]: would come through pragmatism is now actually, you know, just going in the opposite direction.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, this is a big question, to be honest, I think one has to kind of acknowledge that,
[Guest]: you know, we still don't fully know the dynamics of the moment we are in.
[Guest]: I mean, I think a lot of clarity will come in hindsight, but I think two or three observations.
[Guest]: One, I think it's probably always a good rule when thinking about politics to first begin
[Guest]: about what objective facts might have changed.
[Guest]: I mean, I think the point about social media and the generation of a certain kind of discourse
[Guest]: is a very important one, and I think I'll build up to it.
[Guest]: But you know, when we thought of the centrism of Indian politics, and I think there is a
[Guest]: little bit of a difference between India and the US, the outcome might seem similar.
[Guest]: In hindsight, I think the centrism was premised on two facts about social power.
[Guest]: So the first fact was that Indians may not be individually liberal in the way that you
[Guest]: had kind of described, but the sources of social power are fragmented enough that no
[Guest]: force can kind of concentrate them, right?
[Guest]: There are some traditional lines in which they are fragmented, region, caste, even religion
[Guest]: under certain circumstances, right?
[Guest]: The good thing, as the Rudolphs many years ago, the regional propounders of the centrist
[Guest]: thesis said, these natural sources of social power, while they're illiberal internally,
[Guest]: they also act as a certain kind of break on the centralization of power, right?
[Guest]: So the first question for me to ask is, what has happened to these natural breaks, right?
[Guest]: And we always used to say, look, even the old Congress, when it dominated, had to be
[Guest]: a coalition of all of these, right?
[Guest]: You had to build a kind of dominant caste, class, region, religion coalition.
[Guest]: What is it about this moment that the BJP can, in a sense, override them in some ways,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And create this mega majoritarian coalition.
[Guest]: And that, I think, has to do with some profound changes in Indian society, and some are actually
[Guest]: good changes.
[Guest]: I mean, they're the unintended consequences of good changes.
[Guest]: So one, I think what has happened is, the regional parties, in a sense, have also declined
[Guest]: in a manner of speaking.
[Guest]: I mean, there are regional parties, there's DMC, there's DMK, there's a whole bunch of...
[Guest]: But they have declined in the sense that a lot of their edge came from the imminent prospect
[Guest]: of a kind of North Indian, Hindi hegemony being imposed.
[Guest]: And the BJP is sometimes internally divided on this, but for the most part, they have
[Guest]: managed to neutralize that fear, right?
[Guest]: I mean, occasionally people try, and frankly, I think it's much more fashionable in our
[Guest]: circles to make this up.
[Guest]: The result is every regional party thinks that whoever is at center, we can do business
[Guest]: with them, right?
[Guest]: So I think that's what happened to region.
[Guest]: I think caste is in, I think, an interesting position where for many decades after independence,
[Guest]: caste was a mobilizing force, and sometimes in a good way, I mean, in the sense that the
[Guest]: demand was a demand for a certain kind of inclusion, right?
[Guest]: It's not a sort of exclusive demand in some ways, it's just saying, give to us what everybody
[Guest]: has, right?
[Guest]: But the logic of caste inclusion was agglomerative, right?
[Guest]: So when the Dravidian movements first started, you had to build bigger and bigger coalitions.
[Guest]: When the BSP came up in the North, the object was to agglomerate Dalits so that they become
[Guest]: a cohesive social movement.
[Guest]: Mandal did that to the OBCs.
[Guest]: And those agglomerative moments required two things.
[Guest]: A, they required a lot of work of culture.
[Guest]: Most of these came about after years of social movements, right?
[Guest]: And second, they required a focal point around which to mobilize.
[Guest]: So in the South, it was kind of anti-Brahmanism, simplifying it a little bit.
[Guest]: In the North, it became reservations, Mandal became another focal point.
[Guest]: Now, we are at an interesting inflection point where both of the energies of the social movement
[Guest]: have disappeared, right?
[Guest]: Again, BSP, once it came to power, the social movement kind of dissipated under it.
[Guest]: But also the agglomerative potential of a focal point has dissipated, which is now the
[Guest]: demand for reservation is demand for subdivision, right?
[Guest]: EBCs, Jatavs versus Chamars, non-Yadavs versus Yadavs and OBCs, right?
[Guest]: And there isn't a single straightforward focal point, which in a sense unites this agglomerative
[Guest]: mobilization.
[Guest]: And I think the BJP has been very clever in grasping that.
[Guest]: So when in a state like UP, even the Yadav vote is split three ways.
[Guest]: You actually know that the agglomerative power of that mobilization is gone, right?
[Guest]: Now, the good news in this is that what it shows, and you can do a similar thing for
[Guest]: in a sense, class-based things.
[Guest]: So when the Rudolphs wrote their book, you know, the farmer's movement and the labor
[Guest]: movement were the kind of two big poles of it, right?
[Guest]: Now, India actually doesn't have a farmer's movement anymore.
[Guest]: Let's be very clear, partly because the contradictions of different kinds of farmers, partly because
[Guest]: agriculture has become un-renumerative and the fragmentation of thought sizes, the desire
[Guest]: of people to move out, because of the party politicization of local panchayats, right?
[Guest]: None of these basic social identities that were kind of agglomerative forces for mobilization
[Guest]: exist anymore.
[Guest]: At least not in the same, with the same form or same power.
[Guest]: They may crop their head up if somebody poses a real existential threat, right?
[Guest]: And that's what the BJP has been very clever at neutralizing.
[Guest]: So what I think happened to centrist politics in India, let's call it there for want of
[Guest]: that, and partly because I think they were reading too much social science, they all
[Guest]: became socially deterministic.
[Guest]: India's natural checks and balances, not caste, class, religion, region, class, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, nobody can take over the system, right?
[Guest]: And as I said, I think that there is something kind of interesting about this moment because
[Guest]: it has embedded, I mean, you know, you can't even think of class terms, gradient producers
[Guest]: are both consumers and producers, you know, they can work different ways in different
[Guest]: contexts.
[Guest]: Now, once this disembedding happens, then it opens up the space for the creation of
[Guest]: a new kind of agglomerative force, right?
[Guest]: And one thing I think Mr. Modi grasped and BJP grasped is that identities are not natural
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: They have to be created through the work of mobilization, tapping into fears, propaganda.
[Guest]: The left, it's been its biggest failing always, is always socially deterministic, right?
[Guest]: I mean, class will read this off, caste will read this off, and it got together all the
[Guest]: elements of it.
[Guest]: I mean, it got, it has a social movement like the RSS, whatever else you might say about
[Guest]: the RSS, it is actually a social movement.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, even in this age of social media, one of the things we forget that how
[Guest]: much the BJP relies on sheer human power, right, door-to-door campaigning.
[Guest]: I mean, last election, you know, we were visited by the BJP guys six times, right?
[Guest]: I don't think I saw a Congress worker, right?
[Guest]: So it's kind of got that base.
[Guest]: Modi's in a sense, recalibrated that identity into this collective narrative of sort of
[Guest]: hurt, and then of course, he played the card of the decline of the old regime very well,
[Guest]: that that became a symbol of plutocracy, corruption, dynasty, decrepitude, and frankly, that old
[Guest]: order has no fight left in it.
[Guest]: I mean, there's just, right?
[Guest]: So I think, in that sense, I think India is a little bit different, which is that, you
[Guest]: know, what the BJP has, in a sense, managed to do is its version of what the Congress
[Guest]: did between 1920 and 1950, right, which is created a generative, newly generated social
[Guest]: identity.
[Guest]: Now, it needs the other little, you know, occasional, and as I said, it smartly fuses
[Guest]: lots of elements, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I joke with colleagues, one of the things about India is that, you know, it can
[Guest]: be totalitarian, you know, 9am to 10am, it can be democratic in the afternoon, it can
[Guest]: be anarchist in the evening, it can be oligarchic sometime in the day, right?
[Guest]: So he can play the liberal card when he wants triple talaq, he can play a dog whistle card
[Guest]: when he's campaigning in Bihar, right?
[Guest]: So I would still argue, actually, that that driver is actually what's led breakdown, and
[Guest]: the challenge for any opposition is that once politics operates in this way, the entry costs
[Guest]: are now higher, right?
[Guest]: Because now, you can't do what the Congress was trying to do the last election, you know,
[Guest]: somehow the Dalits will get upset and somehow you just hope the Bengalis get upset enough
[Guest]: and you know, the Tamils get upset enough, right?
[Guest]: Because you have to do it as a national scale.
[Guest]: Now, national scale requires resources of a different order of magnitude, it requires
[Guest]: a control in some senses of a propaganda, information machinery, where BJP has a natural
[Guest]: incumbent advantage, I mean, basically, it's cornered all of television media, it manages
[Guest]: to control most of print media, in connivance with Indian capital, right?
[Guest]: And it's interesting that the BJP, when it started out as an insurgent group, used social
[Guest]: media, right?
[Guest]: But contrary to what people thought, traditional media still remains important for it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's important that Ram Madhav appear in the pages of Indian Express, right?
[Guest]: It's important that, you know, scripts go out to television producers all the time,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And because Mr. Modi is in a sense kind of both presidentialized the election in ways
[Guest]: which we did not think possible, the entry barriers for somebody to dislodge are now
[Guest]: going to be just that much higher, right?
[Guest]: So I actually do think there's a, and as I said, part of it is as a result of those complex
[Guest]: development processes that happened in the last 10-15 years, that we actually did see
[Guest]: a little bit of that disembedding from that sociological fatalism.
[Guest]: The polarization in the social media and forms of communication stuff, I think that you're
[Guest]: talking about, I think is interesting, and I don't claim to understand the dynamics of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I mean, is this just a passing phase or a kind of permanent feature?
[Guest]: As I said, the one thing social media does manage to do is because of this asymmetry
[Guest]: between truth and doubt, I think it's much easier to in a sense bring down reputations,
[Guest]: because all you need to, and in a sense, create that platform for a kind of pervasive cynicism.
[Guest]: Each of us has a skeleton in our closet.
[Guest]: That seems to be the one common thread across social media, right?
[Guest]: The way you argue is in a sense you impugn somebody's credibility, right?
[Guest]: Now on the polarization and echo chamber story, the other important feature of social media,
[Guest]: which I think is more important than I think the echo chamber dynamic, because echo chambers
[Guest]: you could in principle correct, I mean, you do exist in other spaces as well other than
[Guest]: social media and presumably interacting with different kinds of people.
[Guest]: The important part of social media is that it completely erases the distinction between
[Guest]: public and private.
[Guest]: So the kind of conversation ethic that might have been okay in private, you sometimes even
[Guest]: use inappropriate words, you sometimes say things for the heck of it.
[Guest]: Once you have put it out in your social media, that actually defines your identity in some
[Guest]: ways, right?
[Guest]: The bad tweet that you made will, in a sense, right?
[Guest]: Now, the minute you make your identities public in that way, it automatically congeals them
[Guest]: and seals them because you have no other option but to defend yourself to death and the tweet
[Guest]: becomes you, right?
[Guest]: Rather than look, okay, I said this, on reflection, I've changed my mind, right?
[Guest]: So in some ways, the performative aspect of this where it has actually made visible are
[Guest]: impulsive thoughts, right?
[Guest]: I mean, philosophers used to have a joke, you know, I think Wittgenstein's advice that
[Guest]: when philosophers greet each other, they should raise their hands and say, slow down, you
[Guest]: know, before you say something.
[Guest]: In a sense, social media, your performance in a sense becomes your identity and defines
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: And to my mind, I mean, this is just anecdotal thing, but when I see, you know, I find the
[Guest]: echo chamber issue less significant, I mean, people still talk to enough different people
[Guest]: and obviously, they're seeing the other echo chambers, I mean, they're responding to that
[Guest]: in some ways, right?
[Guest]: I think it's just the fact that once you've taken a position in public, you know, saying
[Guest]: sorry, withdrawing is simply not an option, right?
[Guest]: The second thing, which is, as Plato said, in democracy, the most corrupting thing is,
[Guest]: of course, the desire for agglomeration and popularity, right?
[Guest]: If what I'm after is more attention, right, then I have to probably differentiate and
[Guest]: say the most outrageous things possible.
[Guest]: The problem is I may be doing it for a pretty, it might almost be a game in some cases, right?
[Guest]: But that in then some senses becomes you, right?
[Guest]: It's an interesting question, you know, how even I'm sure you've experienced this, your
[Guest]: perception of people's arguments and work changes because of what you've seen on them
[Guest]: on social media, right?
[Guest]: And I think there's a good reason liberalism insisted on the distinction between public
[Guest]: and private, not just because the private is a space where you shield yourself from
[Guest]: a kind of public gaze, but because private is also a space where you can churn and form
[Guest]: before you actually appear in public, right?
[Guest]: And that distinction is completely gone.
[Guest]: I mean, we are quite happy making ourselves, you know, I don't want your nighttime thoughts
[Guest]: to be transparent, frankly, right?
[Guest]: But once they are, that's who you become in my eyes.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating insight.
[Amit Varma]: I've just finished writing this essay called a meditation on form, not published it yet,
[Amit Varma]: but it will come in my newsletter, where I am speculating on how the forms that you write
[Amit Varma]: and read shape, not just the content, like it's, of course, a trivial matter that writing
[Amit Varma]: for Twitter will make your content more concise or more simplistic or whatever, but also shape
[Amit Varma]: the person.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of doing that is that, you know, I thank God that Twitter was not around when
[Amit Varma]: I was 20.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, what I would have done is I would have tweeted the kind of nonsense I used to
[Amit Varma]: think that I would have doubled down on it, and I would have become that person.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a great insight that you just shared.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the other thing that I think the other profound way in which social media
[Amit Varma]: has changed us all is that, you know, 20 years ago, there was a broad consensus on the truth,
[Amit Varma]: you got your mainstream newspapers and whatever, and there was a broad sense.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's just everybody choosing her narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And then you just listen to the sources that feed that narrative.
[Amit Varma]: I have a couple of questions for you based on what you were talking about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: based on the BJP and sort of on that one is about the BJP itself, which is that what they
[Amit Varma]: have done is that and whether we attribute this political genius to Amit Shah or Modi
[Amit Varma]: or it's a combination of whatever is a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: But what they did was that they played identarian politics brilliantly in the sense that of
[Amit Varma]: course, all our politics has been identarian, but they manipulated it brilliantly in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that they could go inside UP and they could say, okay, you know, the Yadavs are
[Amit Varma]: gone to us, we'll go for the non Yadav OBCs, we'll go for the non Jatav Dalits, in Maharashtra,
[Amit Varma]: we'll go for the non Maratha OBCs.
[Amit Varma]: So they really figured out which end of the market they want, and they went for that with
[Amit Varma]: great pragmatism.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that they managed to do in that process, as Prashant Jha wrote
[Amit Varma]: about in his book, how the BJP wins, I had an episode with him as well, is that they
[Amit Varma]: became the de facto Dalit Party of India.
[Amit Varma]: Now, whatever activists may say, the bottom line is that more Dalits have voted for the
[Amit Varma]: BJP than their opponents, both in 2014 and 2019.
[Amit Varma]: They've managed to agglomerate that identity within the larger umbrella of whatever they
[Amit Varma]: stand for, which is, you know, very interesting to me.
[Amit Varma]: So the two questions related to this, that I sort of have is that, one, within the BJP,
[Amit Varma]: as we see them today, we see two conflicting impulses.
[Amit Varma]: One impulse is the practical impulse of politics, where you do whatever it takes to power, which
[Amit Varma]: includes mergers and acquisitions, where you'll buy MLAs from the Congress, and you might
[Amit Varma]: have abused them during the election, but you buy them and you form the government and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a practical impulse of power politics.
[Amit Varma]: But the other is also the ideological impulse of being true to their core social movement
[Amit Varma]: and whatever that was, which also you see expressed in ways that I hardly need to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: upon.
[Amit Varma]: So, one question, what do you kind of make of this?
[Amit Varma]: And if it is a movement from the latter towards the former, that is, if it is going to become
[Amit Varma]: more and more pragmatic about retaining power, then does that dilute the ideological edge?
[Amit Varma]: Or since the ideological edge is a dominant strain in the culture, anyway, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: really matter?
[Amit Varma]: That's one question.
[Amit Varma]: And the other question on caste is that the sort of direction we took at our founding
[Amit Varma]: moment of saying that we will transform society from the top down, you know, caste is of course,
[Amit Varma]: we would agree, one of our most grievous problems, if not the original sin of Indian civilization,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it, but was the right way to solve it, the top down approach that we took, which
[Amit Varma]: instead seems to have entrenched a certain kind of toxic identity politics, which just
[Amit Varma]: makes divisions worse, and doesn't actually help with the problem.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So let me begin with the caste question first, and then we'll come to the BJP.
[Guest]: Because I think this, so, you know, Amit, I mean, and I think, I think this is something
[Guest]: I think we have to acknowledge, right, that, I mean, we can debate the merits or demerits
[Guest]: of reforming it through the state.
[Guest]: But the fact of the matter is that reform of that social system did have an element
[Guest]: that would have involved the state.
[Guest]: So first of all, you need a legal structure that outlaws certain forms of discrimination
[Guest]: and so forth.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And, in a sense, a lot of the focus of the debate over caste focused on one instrument,
[Guest]: which was reservations.
[Guest]: And I don't want to use this episode to kind of debate the pros and cons.
[Guest]: I mean, I think the reservations for Dalits were not only justified, but I actually still
[Guest]: think it continued to be justified, we can have an argument over that.
[Guest]: I think what the expansion of reservations to OBCs in the form that they took in Mandal
[Guest]: did was that it actually won, it took out the specificity of the Dalit experience.
[Guest]: And in a sense, the entire discourse became about sharing a particular small pie.
[Guest]: In fact, it left the upper cast of the hook in some ways, because the core of a society,
[Guest]: right, which is you shall not discriminate against people for who they are.
[Guest]: That question kind of dropped out of our consciousness.
[Guest]: You know, we kept saying, look, but we've given reservation, we don't discriminate.
[Guest]: Hello, you know, wake up, right?
[Guest]: So I think that's one thing to, I think, bear in mind.
[Guest]: But I think the larger context, why the reservation debate took the form it did, and frankly,
[Guest]: there's a lot of bad faith on our part, is the state took on that instrument, in my view,
[Guest]: not because it wanted a top-down transformation of society, but because it wanted a cheap
[Guest]: and ineffective transformation of society.
[Guest]: So reservation is cheap, it actually doesn't cost too many resources.
[Guest]: You know, whatever institutions you have, you just kind of, you know, allocate.
[Guest]: What we did not do, which would have taken collective action, was actually make education
[Guest]: accessible.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, if Dr. Ambedkar's plan in 10, 15 years, you know, I mean, it took India
[Guest]: almost 65 years to reach even universal enrollment, right?
[Guest]: So reservation was not about top-down transformation.
[Guest]: Reservation was simply a very cheap way of India's elites satiating the demand for representativeness.
[Guest]: Knowing fully well that one of the advantages of doing reservation is that you take your
[Guest]: attention off these other things.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, in my Knowledge Commission days, we used to often ask politicians, right?
[Guest]: I've been always amazed by the fact that whenever there's reservation, of course, there's a
[Guest]: focal point of mobilization, right, for and against.
[Guest]: Which was the last political party, I mean, I can think of maybe Kamaraj as an exception
[Guest]: in Tamil Nadu, maybe AAP briefly in Delhi now, that actually got really upset about
[Guest]: the quality and accessibility of education to its constituents, which, you know, OBC
[Guest]: or Dalit party, right, asked the question, what is the nature of quality education in
[Guest]: our schools?
[Guest]: So frankly, reservation was our cheap way of warding off the problem.
[Guest]: And the biggest casualty of this, I mean, one is the one you alluded to, which is, does
[Guest]: it entrench identities in a particular way, but I think the even bigger casualty was a
[Guest]: permanent distrust.
[Guest]: So and I have to say that I cannot in good conscience give an answer to this question.
[Guest]: If you go and talk to Dalit students, and OBC students, many of whom are quite willing,
[Guest]: not just willing, but quite happy to envisage a world where reservations were not necessary.
[Guest]: They, of course, understand all the arguments that we make, look, isn't it better to give
[Guest]: everybody education?
[Guest]: Isn't it better to do A, B, C, and D?
[Guest]: But we can't look them in the eye and say with a straight face that anybody actually
[Guest]: intended to do that, right?
[Guest]: So and to me, that's actually the vicious circle.
[Guest]: That's the trust deficit that is now in a sense so deep, right, that it will take, you
[Guest]: know, a 10 year performance by a state to show, look, we can deliver all of these things,
[Guest]: right, that are yours by right such that these things become kind of, you know, unnecessary.
[Guest]: So I think that's one thing I think I do think we have to, in some senses, acknowledge.
[Guest]: And that's why I think many Dalits are able to also participate in this promise of delivery
[Guest]: story, right?
[Guest]: Because from their vantage point, what they have experienced is something that doesn't
[Guest]: inspire trust in the state.
[Guest]: It also, by the way, doesn't inspire trust in political parties.
[Guest]: So for all of the Congress's reliance on apparently on Dalit words, the fact of the matter is
[Guest]: its culture was deeply, deeply exclusionary in all kinds of quotidian ways.
[Guest]: I mean, I have stories from Jagjivan Ram, even as late as the 70s, of kind of, you know,
[Guest]: his cultural experiences in the political party called Congress.
[Guest]: So I think we will have to, in a sense, now demonstrate by action, it's not just a question
[Guest]: of abstractly saying, we'll get your education, we'll give you all these means to participate.
[Guest]: Where do we go on reservations?
[Guest]: As I said, I mean, I think there was, I have no doubt that we need forms of affirmative
[Guest]: action.
[Guest]: But there were different ways of designing it.
[Guest]: I mean, one proposal, which I think I'm very attracted to is Rakesh Basant of IIM Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: You know, he crunched some numbers and he basically said, look, parents' education is
[Guest]: a good proxy predictor of whether the kids get educated or not.
[Guest]: So if both your parents are graduate, chances are, you know, and he said, if you just made
[Guest]: that a proxy criteria for reservation instead of caste, you would actually cover all the
[Guest]: groups that you actually do need to cover, which is some, you know, Dalits and others,
[Guest]: but it's self-liquidating in a nice kind of way, right?
[Guest]: So I think other than for Dalits, I think it is worth opening up the debate, what kind
[Guest]: of access matters.
[Guest]: I think this 10% economic thing is, I think, beside the point, to be honest, I mean, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: Now, the Dalit case, I think, I do think is an exceptional case in India, because it's
[Guest]: the one community where all lines converge, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, OBCs can have a history of, you might say, educational backwardness to
[Guest]: use our official parlance, but not the history of humiliation and discrimination.
[Guest]: In fact, in some cases, they're dominant, not all of them, some of them, right?
[Guest]: Dalits are one group where every single historical line of marginalization, humiliation, a sort
[Guest]: of deep cultural aversion.
[Guest]: Not only was it so deep, but I hate to say this, even in my experience, I still think
[Guest]: there are too many traces of it.
[Guest]: So mere presence is actually important.
[Guest]: I won't say this about any other group.
[Guest]: But I think, yes, for the rest, I think we need to think of, you know, what are better
[Guest]: ways of achieving these objectives.
[Guest]: The BJP argument you made about sort of, you know, will the optionism tame the fanaticism,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That was always our hope, right?
[Guest]: And particularly when the polity was centrist, right?
[Guest]: You know, I remember a political scientist used to joke, you know, even in the early
[Guest]: 2000s, that in India, any party that becomes a ruling party will become like the Congress.
[Guest]: I mean, and it was meant as a kind of constructive joke that you have to sort of move to the
[Guest]: center and, you know, create a patchwork.
[Guest]: And just for reasons I just mentioned, A, I don't think that's necessarily the case
[Guest]: anymore.
[Guest]: B, you know, in the BJP's case, I would put the relationship between opportunism and the
[Guest]: ideological purity slightly differently.
[Guest]: See, in every other political party, we see the opportunism as a betrayal of a principle,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That's how we, you know, it's a practical compromise.
[Guest]: I think one thing we have not noticed in BJP is that in BJP, the opportunism is a ruthless
[Guest]: device for furthering the ideological agenda.
[Guest]: You first consolidate power by all means, only when you have consolidated that power
[Guest]: that you make the next move, right?
[Guest]: Why have, in a sense, we've been surprised over Ram Mandir, Kashmir, Tipar Talag, UCC,
[Guest]: whatever, you know, your pet issue, you know, CA, whatever, right?
[Guest]: You can read it two ways.
[Guest]: You can read it saying there's a opportunist BJP that, you know, brings down governments
[Guest]: that, you know, does horse trading, that issues electoral bonds, that favors certain parts
[Guest]: of Indian capital.
[Guest]: And then there's this ideological purist.
[Guest]: I think in their own imagination, the first is actually the means to the second, which
[Guest]: is the lesson they have learned is consolidate power by all means, then strike.
[Guest]: So the next item on that ideological agenda will come when they are in a position for
[Guest]: it in some ways, right?
[Guest]: And that's one of the, I think, the macabre attractions of the BJP.
[Guest]: You know, you and I think Mr. Modi is compromising on principles.
[Guest]: I think his constituents actually don't see that.
[Guest]: I think they see it as he understands that Hindus need to acquire power by any means
[Guest]: whatsoever in order for that ideological agenda to be fulfilled.
[Guest]: So I think the relationship is a little bit different in some ways, I think, you know,
[Guest]: in this party.
[Guest]: And it's true of ideological parties, right?
[Guest]: Even of the far left, historically, it's been true where because you're so sure of the purity
[Guest]: of your ideological objectives, it becomes easier to justify the ruthlessness of your
[Guest]: means.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, that's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: And as we see after the 2019 elections, you know, 370, the building of the temple, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, they're getting there kind of one by one, we are already at, you know, the end
[Amit Varma]: of our sort of time.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you for some final comments as we move on that, okay, we've, you know, completed
[Amit Varma]: 73 years of our independence or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: The fact is, it is with the hindsight bias that India seems inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And it wasn't so at all, in this shape, or perhaps in any shape, and yet, here we are.
[Amit Varma]: So looking forward, maybe if I ask you to look forward just as little as 10 years, given
[Amit Varma]: what is happening in our democracy, given what is happening in our politics, and so
[Amit Varma]: on, and leaving aside, you know, unforeseen events like pandemics, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Looking forward 10 years, what gives you hope?
[Amit Varma]: And what gives you despair?
[Amit Varma]: Or what's your best case scenario for India?
[Amit Varma]: And what's your worst case scenario?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, looking into the future, you feel like lying, even if you turn out
[Guest]: to be right, because you have no basis for saying what to say, um, I think, two things.
[Guest]: So let me return to the broader frame of the conversation we started with.
[Guest]: And so this is the wildly optimistic scenario.
[Guest]: Okay, this is, this is like, I mean, and I'm saying optimistic, it's not just visual thinking,
[Guest]: but it would go something like this, that look, there was a settlement that happened
[Guest]: at partition.
[Guest]: Pakistan obviously did not fare well as a result of that settlement.
[Guest]: And partly because the premise of that settlement was bound to produce the kind of pathologies
[Guest]: that you saw in Pakistan.
[Guest]: Once you have a religious state, once you believe in blasphemy laws, once you say it's
[Guest]: an Islamic state, even if Jinnah wanted it to be a relatively liberal Islamic state,
[Guest]: you're still benchmarking insiders and outsiders, and you do to Ahmadiyyas what you do, and
[Guest]: the whole thing falls apart, right?
[Guest]: A little bit of that dialectic is beginning to be unleashed in India as well.
[Guest]: In a sense that, and the BJP actually does, we are doing the unfinished work of partition.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a kind of performative sort of admission in that we want to be kind of
[Guest]: like Pakistan, right?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, the wildly optimistic scenario is that, look, we do have three to five, six years
[Guest]: of serious conflict around this, can't predict the scale of violence, but I think some violence
[Guest]: is going to be, it's just in the nature of these things, right?
[Guest]: But what that does is that actually concentrates our mind back on why we were doing certain
[Guest]: things that we were in fact doing.
[Guest]: And that one of the things that South Asia will need, I mean, I actually do strongly
[Guest]: believe, frankly, that India and Pakistan's trajectories are very closely entwined.
[Guest]: I think we underestimate the degree, I mean, yes, they're diverging, India has done partly
[Guest]: better, but not as much as we like to think.
[Guest]: That we still haven't come to terms with, in a sense, the legacy of 1947.
[Guest]: And that's a legacy that distorts both our domestic politics.
[Guest]: In Pakistan, that's the impetus of creating a particular relationship between the military
[Guest]: and Islam.
[Guest]: And here now we are kind of using it.
[Guest]: So the optimistic scenario is that, look, you know, we go back and rethink, right, 1947
[Guest]: and say, I mean, I don't mean we become one country, but that's not going to happen.
[Guest]: But we say that, look, the fundamental premise by which we defined our identity post-1947,
[Guest]: unexplicitly, India in a fuzzy, modus vivendi way, is no longer, in a sense, sustainable.
[Guest]: And it's running up against a second fact, which is important, and I think going to be
[Guest]: very significant on the optimistic side, is that while intra-religious conflict, or rather
[Guest]: inter-religious conflict has occupied our attention, actually the fault lines on freedom
[Guest]: and oppression are within each of our communities, right?
[Guest]: The fact of the matter is young men and women in both communities are looking for different
[Guest]: kinds of liberation, sometimes pathologically, right?
[Guest]: That sociological dynamic is also going to research itself at some point, right?
[Guest]: And the advantage of that dynamic is that it actually gives people in different communities
[Guest]: a similar language to talk about, right, that we are actually all kind of oppressed by some
[Guest]: of the traditional structures we inherited.
[Guest]: So maybe what has happened is that that deep freeze in which we had put this conversation
[Guest]: in 1947 is actually finally bubbling up in a pathological way.
[Guest]: There will be some conflict, it will work itself out, and we will actually realize that
[Guest]: the subcontinent needs to be the zone of shared freedom that you and I want it to be.
[Guest]: That's the only rational way of resolving these conflicts.
[Guest]: If identity is the basis for doing it, it's a precarious, fragile, unfree existence.
[Guest]: So that's the optimistic scenario, right, that this is a...
[Guest]: I think a pessimistic one is in a sense that, you know, which is that the scale of the violence
[Guest]: that we experience in interim, the scale of marginalization, you know, produces historically
[Guest]: unprecedented levels of suffering.
[Guest]: And so that process is really long run out.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the 30 Years War was a 30 years religious war, right?
[Guest]: You could say we had a kind of 10 year civil war in the 40s.
[Guest]: We then sort of had a punctuated pause.
[Guest]: Now we are kind of returning back to it.
[Guest]: But you know, maybe you could stretch it out 15, 20 years, but I hope the first one is
[Guest]: what happens.
[Amit Varma]: Even your first one has a lot of violence embedded in it.
[Amit Varma]: But what to do?
[Amit Varma]: These are the times that we live in.
[Amit Varma]: Pratap, thank you so much for, you know, sharing so much of your time and so many of your insights
[Amit Varma]: with me.
[Guest]: It's a great privilege that you came on my show.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: So thank you so much for your patience, Amit.
[Guest]: Thanks for you to your listeners as well.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this conversation, you can follow Pratap on Twitter at pbmehta,
[Amit Varma]: one word pbmehta.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye.